The purpose of this article is to set out the key elements of the Chaos Theory of Careers. The complexity of influences on career development presents a significant challenge to traditional predictive models of career counseling. Chaos theory can provide a more appropriate description of career behavior, and the theory can be applied with clients in counseling. The authors devote particular attention to the application of attractor concepts to careers.
The authors, using a cocoon maintenance or metamorphosis metaphor, articulate the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, threats, and future vision for career counseling. Major strengths in career counseling include the growth and development of career theory, research, and practice. Weaknesses are identified in terms of career counseling practices that maintain localized career standards. Opportunities exist for the profession to assist clients in redefining their careers on the basis of ownership and life stories. The continued devaluation of career counseling in counselor education programs is seen as a threat. The authors conclude with their vision for the future for the discipline and profession of career counseling.
Although existing literature suggests that client anticipations affect career counseling, previous studies have not systematically assessed client anticipations prior to using computer-assisted career guidance (CACG) systems in career counseling. This study describes how 55 clients from a career center at a large, southeastern university anticipated using CACG systems to help in their career decision making and problem solving. Using a Cognitive Information Processing framework, responses to a cued and a free response survey indicated that clients' most frequent anticipations included increased career options, enhanced self-knowledge, and strengthened occupational knowledge.
The authors explored client psychological distress as a variable in career counseling. Forty-two clients in a naturalistic setting were seen for a total of 290 sessions by 21 counselors-in-training. The results indicated that (a) 60% of the clients were psychologically distressed, (b) clients' scores decreased significantly from pretest to posttest on psychological distress variables, (c) significant linear growth occurred in the clients' perception of the working alliance across sessions, and (d) the psychological distress outcome variables were significantly related to both the first session level of the working alliance and its linear growth.
The authors examine the usefulness of postmodernism in career counseling. Specifically, a case is made for broadening career counseling theories and techniques to feature the contextual influences inherent in each individual's unique career history. A career intervention, titled the Career-O-Gram, is introduced as a tool for exploring contextual influences on career development. A case study is presented to demonstrate the application of the Career-O-Gram.
This article describes an effort to apply a theoretical perspective developed in one country (the United States) to cope with increasing demand for career services and limited funding in another country (the United Kingdom) faced with similar increasing demands for cost-effective service delivery. The authors hope that the experience gained in the transnational application of theory to practice they present can be replicated in other countries using other theoretical perspectives. This article describes the process used in one transnational career theory adaptation project and discusses implications for transnational adaptations of career theory across countries.
Work during adolescence, including part-time work during the school;year, has been viewed as vocational behavior with mixed effects on other behaviors and attitudes. Using two different samples (West Point cadets and high school seniors who qualified for ROTC membership), we examined possible positive and negative correlates of adolescent work as a function of work dimensions, and both concurrent and subsequent performance criteria. Results indicated that concurrent costs and benefits of adolescent employment may depend on dimensions of work as well as adolescent characteristics. Similarly, adolescent employment was found to be generally related to subsequent work motivation and nonacademic performance.
This study (a) assesses whether employed young people, unemployed school-leavers, and unemployed young people who have working experience differ in their psychological well-being, that is stress, depression, and general feelings of happiness; (b) examines the effects of these three work: conditions on development and structure of identity; and (c) investigates the effects of identity structure on psychological well-being. The favorability hypothesis of social comparison theory seems fit to explain the relation between identity structure and psychological well-being.
This study tested Super's model of career adaptability by examining the relationships between career development concerns, values, and role salience among 881 men employed full-time in a cement factory. They responded to the Adult Career Concerns Inventory, the Values Inventory, and the Salience Inventory. The inter-correlations of the resulting scores were appropriately small and coincided with theoretical predictions. A principal components analysis clarified the latent structure of the relations between and among the scales. The results supported both Super's model of career adaptation and his model for Career Development Assessment and Counseling.
In this article it is argued that ''career'' and ''personal'' counseling should not be viewed as different types of counseling because: (a) the holistic philosophy of counseling emphasizes helping ''whole'' persons whose lives contain many important and meaningful roles; (b) recent research on the implications of gender and race for career development further demonstrates the inseparability of our career and ''personal'' lives; and (c) there are numerous commonalities in the ''career'' and ''personal'' counseling process.
This study compared the presenting psychological symptom status and the counseling duration of career and noncareer clients. Although no significant differences in the psychological status of the two groups were noticed, career clients did attend significantly fewer counseling sessions than did clients with noncareer concerns. Implications of these findings for college counseling centers are offered.
Friends' influence on achievement-related choices in female adolescents was investigated using the Thematic Apperception Test (H. Murray, 1943), in the context of self-in-relation theory (J. V. Jordon, ii. G. Kaplan, J. B, Miller, I. P. Stiver, & J. L. Surrey, 1991). Two hypotheses were tested: (1) Achievement-related stimuli will elicit stories with more unfavorable and conflicted outcomes than will affiliation stimuli; (2) Thematic representation of achievement will be more homogeneous in more highly cohesive peer groups. A multivariate analysis of variance with repeated measures yielded significant results for Hypothesis 1. Thematic analysis of stories supported Hypothesis 2, showing peer group influence on achievement strivings in female adolescents.
The author presents the 6 stages in the development of career counseling in the United States. In the Ist stage (1890-1919), placement services were offered for an increasingly urban and industrial society. In the 2nd stage (1920-1939), educational guidance through the elementary and secondary schools became the focal point. The 3rd stage (1940-1959) saw the focus shift to colleges and universities and the training of counselors. The 4th stage (1960-1979) was the boom for counseling and the idea of work having meaning in a person's life came to the forefront; organizational career development began during this period. The 5th stage (1980-1989) saw the beginning of the transition from the industrial age to the information age and the growth of both the independent practice of career counseling and outplacement counseling. The 6th stage (1990-present), with its emphasis on technology and changing demographics, has seen an increased sophistication in the uses of technology, the internationalization of career counseling, the beginnings of multicultural career counseling, and the focus on the school-to-job transition.
The Internet has evolved so rapidly that there is little information on integrating Internet-based distance guidance opportunities with resources and services provided by existing career centers. In this article, the author describes career centers and then explores the need for career centers in the information age, the types of Internet web sites, the functions of an integrated web site in promoting cost-effectiveness, options for integrating user needs, the role of instructional design in web site development, cost-effectiveness and staff collaboration, web master responsibilities, Internet web site implementation, staff training, and ethical issues. This article is based on a paper presented at a seminar titled, Guidance in Open Learning Environments in the Finnish Polytechnics at Espoo-Vantaa Polytechnic, Vantaa, Finland, 1998.
Responses to the Adult Career Concerns inventory (ACCI: Super, Thompson, Lindeman, Myers, & Jordaan, 1988) were organized through cluster analysis to identify different; ways in which adults use exploratory behavior to cope with career development tasks. Significant differences in life-role salience among the types of adult career explorers identified were also investigated. Findings indicated a variety of ways in which adults use exploratory behavior. However, no significant differences were found in life-role salience among the types of career explorers. The discussion explains how career counselors can interpret their clients' ACCI profiles to select appropriate career interventions.
Herr (1996), Bloch (1996), and Watts (1996) highlight important shifts that are occurring in the structure of work, in social policy related to career services, and in the ecological context of guidance. Such shifts may have far-reaching implications for the science and practice of career development, particularly for counselors' roles in assisting individuals and organizations with issues of work preparation and transition. This article revisits some of the authors' key assumptions and observations, offering additional suggestions for ensuring that career theory, research, practice, and policy remain responsive to the changing social-political-economic context.
To investigate differences in the career experiences of Black women in traditional and nontraditional professions, a sample of Black professional women in traditional (e.g., social work, teaching, counseling) and nontraditional (e.g., law, medicine, engineering) professions were mailed a questionnaire asking about career experiences, family life, and other personal characteristics. Marriage was reported to be more of a career barrier for nontraditionals than traditionals. Nontraditionals also reported more career-related marital discord than did traditionals. Nontraditionals were more likely to report barriers to career success such as racial and gender discrimination, limited opportunities to develop political clout, and colleagues' doubts about their competence. Nontraditionals also reported less peer support than did traditionals.
This article reviews research literature of the past 15 years to assess the impact of four factors on women's career continuity: (a) husband's attitude toward his wife's paid employment, (b) financial considerations, (c) household responsibilities, and (d) wife's personality variables. Particular issues relevant to career counselors are highlighted throughout this review and a variety of career related strategies are presented that can be used to assist clients in achieving this balance. As the number of women in the labor force continues to increase, women's ability to effectively balance family and career concerns will be essential to successful and continuous employment.
Postmodern approaches to career counseling are well suited to addressing the challenges a postindustrial world poses to career development and overall life design. In this, the 1st of 2 articles exploring theory and practice, the authors examine the differences between traditional trait and factor models of career counseling and postmodern approaches using life narratives and social constructionism. As career counselors and marriage and family therapists, the authors' approach to career development integrates the literature on postmodern family therapy with emerging narrative approaches to career counseling. The 2nd article (C. Campbell & M. Ungar, 2004) discusses 7 aspects of the authors' daily practice as postmodern career counselors.
The authors examined the use of counselor response modes in career counseling-including the overall proportion of each response mode and the relationship of each response mode to the working alliance. Participants were 19 counselors-in-training and 26 clients in 78 sessions, making this the largest reported study of career counselor response modes. Seventy-nine percent of the counselor responses were information, paraphrase, or close-ended questions. None of the categorized counselor responses was significantly and positively related to the working alliance, although counselor self-disclosure had a significant negative correlation with the alliance. The type of self-disclosure used was largely irrelevant or self-deprecating.
unannounced, telephone follow-up evaluation of 181 out-of-school adults who had enrolled in 1 of 2 programs of individual career counseling at a university extension center indicated that 78% were satisfied or very satisfied. Eighty five percent reported that they were following through on their counseling in a variety of ways, including pursuing further education (35%) and changing jobs or occupations (14%). Satisfaction was not related at a statistically significant level to completion of their allotted counseling interviews, program, gender, or education level. The discussion considers the implications for offering career counseling to adults and for future research.
The Knowledge-Information-Service Era (KIS) is reflecting exponential changes in social, economic, government, career, education, work, and other life systems. Changes in work and workplace present a challenge to education and educationplace to provide concentrated attention to career development. Career education is an answer to the challenge. School counselors have a changing role in supporting the needs of students and workers for basic academic skills, productive work habits, work values, and means of relating paid and unpaid work as parts of total lifestyle.
This article analyzes selected results of 4 Kuder Occupational Interest Surveys (KOIS; Kuder & Zytowski, 1991) administered over a 30-year span, in the light of the author's career as a counseling psychologist. Certain consistencies and changes are observed, leading to a conclusion supporting the ''thematic'' interpretation of interest inventory results rationalizing aspects of the author's occupational and avocational career.
At-risk populations pose a major challenge to the counseling professional. This article describes a career development program for at-risk youth and delineates both the process and the outcomes of a combined quantitative and qualitative program evaluation. The results suggest that at-risk youth can benefit significantly from this career development program. A combination of work and curricular experiences seemed to be effective with this population.
Case examples are presented demonstrating the interconnection between career and noncareer issues. Comprehensive and intensive personal exploration is needed to uncover the relatedness of seemingly disparate areas of clients' lives. When comprehensive person-oriented career counseling is done there is recognition and integration of career and life-style dynamics.
The purpose of this review was to integrate information from selected journal articles, book chapters, and a few books published in 1991 about careers. More than 140 entries were selected from more than 400 identified and were organized under three broad categories: (a) understanding careers, (b) the context of careers, and (c) career interventions. Each category was subdivided into thematic sections containing several entries on the same topic. The material, both from individual entries and integrated themes, was interpreted as lessons for the professional development of counselors, program planners, and researchers.
The construct of career maturity has played a prominent role in career development theory. To have practical significance, however, career counselors should know that career maturity is linked to actual career-related behaviors. Toward this end, the current study investigated whether a meaningful relationship existed between an attitudinal measure of career maturity and a measure of career maturity reflecting job performance-related behavioral competencies in a sample of minority youth. Only modest relationships were found between several career maturity attitudes and the behavioral measures. Results are discussed and implications for career counselors working with minority adolescents are provided.
Parents' intentions associated with critical incidents they undertake in the career development of their children are examined from an intentional action perspective. From interviews with 207 parents, 1,772 critical incidents were identified. Approximately half of the incidents contributed to the construction of 10 categories representing the intentions of parents; the remainder was used to substantiate the categories. The categories illustrate that parents, although not necessarily attempting to influence particular occupational choice, are active agents in influencing their children in a broad range of areas in career development.
The vocational pathways of a representative national sample of Australian school students (N = 1,201) were examined over a 7-year period after the students left school. Results indicated that there was a disparity between the students' initial vocational interests and their occupations at the beginning of their careers. Only 21% of the students were in identical high-point interest areas at initial assessment and 7 years later, The results suggested that there was a period of career exploration that was followed by adjustment to the labor market.
The commitment to social change demonstrated by the founder of vocational psychology, Frank Parsons, continues in several areas of vocational psychology today, including individual career counseling, guidance work in the schools, career interventions with special populations, and vocational research. This article highlights ways in which career counselors and vocational psychologists have focused and can continue to focus their practice and research to improve the condition of society and to provide interventions that enhance the ability of all individuals to love and to work in a meaningful way.
Many transition plans for students with learning disabilities suffer because (a) they often focus on the employment needs of students with more severe cognitive and physical disabilities and (b) they are not required until as late as 14 years old, sometimes too late for many students with learning disabilities. Lack of effective transition planning may result in inadequate postsecondary adjustment problems (e.g., under- or unemployment, restricted participation in community and leisure activities). The authors describe specific problems in transition planning for students with learning disabilities and offer suggestions for designing K-12 transition plans that are uniquely suited for these students.
The authors present descriptive data on 464 high school students' perceptions of various factors that might influence their current career expectations. Results suggest that high school adolescents are aware of a variety of internal and external influences on their current career expectations. Girls endorsed more types of influence for mothers, female friends, and female teachers than did boys.
The authors examine work-family commitment and attitudes toward feminism in a cross-sectional, medical student sample (126 women, 145 men). Results indicated no significant gender differences in commitment levels. Third-year students reported significantly more family commitment than did students in lower years. Women reported significantly more positive attitudes toward feminism than did men. Future research should examine commitment to work and family roles relative to participation in work and family roles and whether medical students have more conservative attitudes toward feminism than do other groups. Reframing multiple role commitments as an opportunity for role integration may help clients identify how work and family can be mutually enhancing and growth-producing rather than conflictual.
The author investigated the impact of a 4-phase combined intervention on outcomes of career certainty, career indecision, and client satisfaction in undecided college students and compared it to a 2-phase intervention. Both interventions were effective in increasing career certainty in the sample population; however, the 4-phase treatment was significantly more effective in increasing career certainty. Both treatments were effective in decreasing career indecision, although no significant difference was found between these 2 groups. There-was no significant difference in ratings of satisfaction between the 2 groups. The findings suggest that even the most basic and cost-effective intervention may benefit the undecided student.
Job satisfaction, leisure satisfaction, and psychological health were measured for 189 adult men who were employed full time. Job satisfaction and leisure satisfaction were found to be significant positive predictors of psychological health. Stepwise regression analyses indicated that job satisfaction was the better predictor of psychological health, but leisure satisfaction added significantly to the prediction. Although job satisfaction was significantly higher for white-collar (professional) workers than for blue-collar workers, the prediction of psychological health by the independent variables was not affected by occupational status. Theoretical and counseling implications are discussed.
A multistate survey of public high schools revealed general unfamiliarity among principals and counselors with national workforce preparation policies as represented by the SCANS Report (Secretary's Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills, 1991) and the National Career Development Guidelines (National Occupational information Coordinating Committee, 1989); a lack of commitment to career development program outcomes for all student groups, particularly those at risk of dropping out; uneven delivery of services, with least attention to cultural diversity outcomes; and underutilization of counselors. The article concludes with an examination of the historical and cultural forces operating for and against sustained efforts in workforce preparation programs.
This article discusses the career development and the career counseling needs of populations who have Limited access to educational and occupational opportunities. The article reviews some of the Limitations of current theories and interventions and offers recommendations for applying social cognitive career theory (SCCT; Lent, Brown, & Hackett, 1994) to populations that are at risk for experiencing employment and career barriers. To illustrate one application of SCCT, a career intervention program for adult female offenders is presented.
No comprehensive model of the career development of racial and ethnic minorities has yet been developed; even less attention has been devoted to models of the career development of racial and ethnic minority women. One of the more promising career theories that may prove satisfactory in accounting for ethnicity in career development is Bandura's (1986) social cognitive theory (Lent & Brown, 1996; Lent, Brown, & Hackett, 1994). In this article, the authors selectively review the Literature on African American women's career development to clarify how social cognitive mechanisms mag be operating. The primary focus of this conceptual analysis is on the central elements of social cognitive theory, namely, self-efficacy and outcome expectations. Implications for counseling are presented.
This study examined the relationship between the composition by sex of women's high school and college environments as well as the sex of their selected influential teachers in each of these settings and their reported self-efficacy in careers judged traditional or nontraditional for women. Two hundred and seventy-four junior and senior female students from both single-sex and coeducational private liberal arts colleges served as participants. Results indicated no main effects for composition by sex of an institution, or the sex of influential teachers, nor were there any significant two-way interactions. Two significant (p<.05) three-way interactions did emerge, however. One indicated that nontraditional career self-efficacy was predicted by a single-sex high school and college environment with either no high school influential teacher or the choice of a male one. The second predicted three-way interaction indicated increased nontraditional career self-efficacy by students attending single-sex high schools and colleges and choosing a male college influential teacher.
This study investigated the similarity of family members and co-workers. A total of 75 human service workers each rated up to four positive and four negative family members, and four positive and four negative co-workers on six dimensions drawn from Holland's (1985) six vocational types. The results indicated that positive family members were significantly more similar to positive co-workers than were negative co-workers. Negative family members were significantly more similar to negative co-workers than were positive co-workers. These results were interpreted to support the general proposition that individuals re-enact family dramas in work, suggesting that a major way that a family drama is established in work involves casting co-workers in customary roles.
The counselor's role in facilitating career development remains dynamic as lifelong learning, expanding lifestyle options, and the changing workplace present new opportunities. In response, most practitioners follow some common theoretical assumptions as their foundation. As the career development field celebrates its place and embraces the millennium, the work of John Holland, the developmental perspective promoted by JoAnn Harris-Bowlsbey, and John Krumboltz's social learning theory are captured through this personal view of the career development journey. Unique insights about the context of their work and view of the future workplace are shared.
The purpose of this exploratory ethnographic research project was to investigate the career development experiences of Latinas employed in counseling and faculty positions in higher education. The research reveals strong images of an inhospitable and nonsupportive place to work and suggests that Latina women are inhibited from achieving the same levels of success as men or other women in higher education. Implications for career development practitioners are provided.
Students' identity formation and perceptions of parental acceptance and encouragement of independence were investigated as predictors of career indecision. The Mother-Father-Peer Scale (Epstein, 1983), Extended Objective Measure of Ego Identity Status (Bennion & Adams, 1986), and Career Decision Scale (Osipow, Carney, Winer, Yanico, & Koschier, 1976) were administered to 169 undergraduate students with a mean age of 19.68. Analysis using multiple regression indicated that career indecision was predicted by a greater degree of identity moratorium and diffusion, less maternal acceptance and fewer years in college. Suggestions for future research and counseling applications are provided.
This study examined the extent to which gender and type of job influenced pay expectations in elementary school, secondary school, and college students. Participants were presented with a list of 12 jobs evenly divided between primarily female, primarily male, and gender neutral occupations. Using a relative rating scale, participants were asked to indicate how much they should make if they were in the occupation. A significant interaction was found between type of job and gender for pay expectations. Suggestions for using this information in applied settings are provided.
This study sought to identify which career counseling work behaviors are unique to the specialty of career counseling and which career counseling work behaviors are an element of general counseling practice. Career counseling work behaviors related to assessment and counseling were judged to be fundamental to the general practice of counseling. Career counseling work behaviors related to program management, information, and consultation were judged to be fundamental to the specialty practice of career counseling. Implications for counselor certification and counseling program accreditation are discussed.
This study examines relationships between leisure behavior and occupational identity in a group of 109 undergraduate students at a Midwestern state university. Significant relationships (p < .01) were found among thinking and contemplating, ethical leisure behavior, and occupational identity. University students who participated more in intellectual and creative leisure activities were more advanced in occupational identity achievement. Implications for life span career development interventions are discussed.
The four segments in the Life-span, life-space approach to comprehending and intervening in careers (individual differences, development, self, and context), constitute four perspectives on adaptation to life roles. Adaptation serves as a bridging construct to integrate the complexity engendered by viewing vocational behavior from four distinct vantage points. To correspond to adaptation as the core construct, career adaptability should replace career maturity as the critical construct in the developmental perspective on adaptation. Moreover, adaptability could be conceptualized using developmental dimensions similar to those used to describe career maturity, namely planning, exploring, and deciding.
This article represents a first step toward a vocational psychology of lesbians that incorporates scholarship in lesbian and women's identity development and that is considered within the larger framework of women's career development. First, literature in lesbian and women's identity development is reviewed, followed by a discussion of the vocational issues of lesbians as related both to identity development and to the literature in the vocational psychology of women. The article concludes with suggestions for research and practice.
The author analyzes the context in which professional career counseling in the U.S. exists at the beginning of the 21st century and makes recommendations to enhance the growth and development of the profession. The issues addressed include developing curricula, training career counselors, broadening the focus on career decision making to include work adjustment, improving the basic and advanced skills of career counselors, and extending career services to diverse groups in the U.S. and to people in other nations. Specific strategies that address each of these issues are discussed.
Indecisive students often present with social skills problems, which may make academic and vocational decision-making tasks difficult and complex for them. Moreover, choices regarding one's future require the ability to gather information, to search for help and support, to stave off intrusiveness and pressures, and to communicate one's decisions. Social competencies, particularly, play a significant role in vocational guidance activities. This article presents a training program devised to augment assertive competencies in indecisive students choosing a university course of study. Intended aims and the analyses to assess the efficacy of the intervention through self-evaluation and role-play assessment are described.
The authors investigated differences in interpersonal influences on career decision making between gay, Lesbian, and bisexual(GLB) and heterosexual college students. Contrary to hypotheses, GLB students reported having more career role models than did heterosexual students, and the amount of inspiration received from role models did not differ between the 2 groups. However, GLB students perceived they received less support and guidance from others in their academic and career decision making. As expected, GLB students were more likely to endorse the importance of a career role model's sexual orientation and support of people with their own sexual orientation. Career intervention and research implications are discussed.
This article discusses the importance of collaboration among professional organizations, governmental entities, and counselors in behalf of career development. Examples of possible international and national collaborative initiatives and policy emphases are described.
A qualitative study investigated the meaning and experience of career for 8 women between the ages of 40 and 65 years who identified themselves as artists and whose primary career pursuits were in the visual, performing, or literary arts. The question that guided this phenomenological investigation was: What is the meaning and experience of career as it is lived by women artists? Three in-depth interviews were conducted with each participant over 2 years. Detailed analysis of the interview transcripts identified 9 common themes in the lives and career development of these women artists. The implications of the findings for career theory, counseling practice, and research are discussed.
This study investigated the influences on the career decisions of women who grew up in a rural community. Forty women were interviewed who graduated in the upper 10% of their high school classes in the 1950s, '60s, '70s, and '80s. The results are described in three components: gender role beliefs, factors, and contexts. Gender role beliefs were the most pervasive influences found. Other factors were (a) information, (b) meeting others' expectations, (c) barriers, (d) sense of empowerment, (e) conditions of work, and (f) personal values. The participants were also affected by their social and historical contexts and their development stages.
This article provides a comprehensive review of the professional Literature on career counseling interventions with gay and lesbian clients. It summarizes the practice knowledge gleaned from that literature and makes recommendations on what research needs to be conducted to establish the area of gay and lesbian career development in the published research literature.
This article provides career counselors with a practical procedure, based on decision and information processing theories, for assisting clients in making career decisions. The proposed procedure, which is derived from the sequential elimination approach, considers the individual's limited cognitive and material resources and provides specific guidelines aimed at facilitating career decision making and increasing the quality of the process and its outcomes. The proposed procedure has been found useful in making variuos types of career decisions.
This article suggests that counselors measure vocational interests by using three interest inventories: the Ramak Interest Inventory, the Courses Interest Inventory, and the Self-Directed Search (Holland, 1985). Some implications from studies on (a) vocational congruence, (b) environmental congruence, (c) the structure of occupational fields and (d) within-occupation congruence are discussed. Five defense mechanisms for clients who happen to be in an incongruent occupation or environment are presented.
As America's occupational society moves from a low skills to a high wages nature, the popularity of both work-based learning in general and youth apprenticeship in particular is growing rapidly. Both counseling and counselors in educational settings are currently being downplayed, and job mentors are being played up by leaders in the youth apprenticeship movement. The need to counsel persons regarding a variety of forms of postsecondary education is growing rapidly. The counseling profession should become actively involved in meeting this need with respect to all forms of work-based learning. The challenges are especially great with respect to youth apprenticeship programs.
An essential component of successful career counseling is giving the client concise and functional feedback. This article describes a visual method for condensing and presenting feedback to career counseling clients on their vocational needs and satisfaction as assessed by the Minnesota Importance Questionnaire paired form (MIQ) and the long-form Minnesota Satisfaction Questionnaire (MSQ). The method involves forming a satisfaction x importance grid based on dividing MIQ and MSQ scores for each of 20 vocational needs into three ranges (low, moderate, and high). This method is designed to enhance clients' self-understanding and promote career planning. The instruments and their place in career counseling are briefly described and the application of the grid is illustrated using results from a vocational assessment.
This case report presents the thoughts and experiences of a professional mediator. The narrative tells the story of a 46-year-old Caucasian woman who has overcome numerous barriers only to find herself in the midst of a formidable career crisis. The crisis originated when powerful people in her field attempted to force her to act in ways that were incongruent with her self-concept and vocational identity. She has come to the career counselor seeking direction and an effective resolution of her career crisis.
The authors present a case of a 15-year-old Mexican American adolescent girl who is uncertain about her educational and career future. The ecological model of career development (E. P. Cook, M. J. Heppner, & K. M. O'Brien, 2002) is applied to the case. The authors suggest career counseling interventions for this client and discuss potential concerns and issues that may arise in career counseling with this client.
The author presents a case study that depicts an African American student's experience in her graduate program, as described to a career counselor. The ecological model of career development (E. P. Cook, M. J. Heppner, & K. M. O'Brien, 2002), which addresses both the microsystems and macrosystems levels of analyses, is applied to the case. The author presents proposed interventions for use with the client and discusses potential barriers to effective multicultural career counseling.
International collaboration on research projects is becoming important as countries experience similar problems that need attention. The process of such research collaboration is discussed with specific reference to initiating collaborative research, evaluating the potential of entering into a research partnership, preparing for travel, developing and completing a project, and maintaining international collaborative research relationships. Factors that enhance and diminish such relationships are also discussed.
Twenty years of research on multiple subtypes of career undecided and decided students was examined to determine if any similarities exist across the types identified in these studies. Some common characteristics of students at various levels of decidedness seemed evident in the 15 studies reviewed. This article organizes the results of these studies based on level of decision status and the descriptions of characteristics or traits ascribed to the students in various types. Counseling implications are offered for each type.
Occupational preparation is directed at giving young people access to continuing and rewarding employment. It attempts to impart personal qualities and competencies that will attract potential employers and provide the particular skills necessary for employment in different kinds of jobs. This article addresses the first of these two issues: what are the basic elements of employability, and how do young people acquire them?
The author reviews and summarizes more than 200 articles related to career development issues that were published in 1995. The goals were to identify articles relevant to clinicians and to provide a comprehensive and coherent overview of the career development literature. The articles were reviewed and organized within seven areas: counselor-client relations, business and industry, university career centers, career development theories, gender differences, work and family issues, and cross-cultural issues. Implications for future research directions and for assisting clients with their career development challenges are discussed.
Values are widely viewed as central to the selection of, and subsequent satisfaction with, life roles. But because no conceptual framework has been advanced to guide the work of practitioners and researchers, values are widely ignored by both groups. This article sets forth several propositions aimed at remedying this oversight by clarifying the importance of values in both decision making and life satisfaction.
The Graduate Studies Awareness Program at Ball State University, sponsored by the Career Services office, is an innovative program that helps students who may be considering attending graduate or professional school instead of looking immediately for professional employment.
It has generally been assumed that a linear relationship exists between vocational interests and self-efficacy. Bandura (1986) suggested, however, that persons require some amount of reasonable challenge in activities to sustain their interest, and that the relationship of interest to self-efficacy thus may be curvilinear. This research extended and remedied previous literature and tested explicitly Bandura's concept of a threshold. Results suggest general support for a linear relationship between interest and self-efficacy (rs are .62-.68), although curvilinear self-efficacy terms contributed significantly to two of three regression equations. Contrary to predictions, plots suggest interest may be stable at lower levels of self-efficacy and may increase linearly at higher levels.
This study surveyed the opinions of a national random sample of school counselors toward the importance of the elementary, junior high/middle, and high school competencies in the National Career Development Guidelines. The results of the study indicated that school counselors consider the career development competencies in the guidelines to be important to very important across the three levels.
Perceptions of expertness, attractiveness, and trustworthiness of computer-assisted guidance systems, as measured by an adapted version of the Counselor Rating Form (CRF), were compared for 107 college students in two treatment conditions (DISCOVER and SIGI) and a computer imaging control condition. Findings showed that students in the DISCOVER and SIGI conditions had more positive perceptions of the attractiveness of systems than those in the computer imaging group. In a review of related studies using the CRF in actual counseling, students seemed to attribute comparable levels of expertness to the computer, but not so with attractiveness or trustworthiness. Implications of these findings for the optimal use of CACG systems and for research are
This review of the 1990 literature on career development and counseling emphasizes literature on career counseling approaches and interventions, and literature related to the general theme of work within a life. This theme addresses how work simultaneously expresses and influences how an individual functions as an integrated psychological being. The importance of the context of an individual's life is also emphasized throughout the review. Topics include race, sex, and multiple role issues, selected career choice issues and indecision, coping on the job, and job change and unemployment. Implications for career counseling are provided.
The authors address the practice, training, professional, and ethical issues of career coaching and propose recommendations regarding the professional organization, training certification, code of ethics, research, and multicultural issues related to the field.
The authors examined continuity in career development from adolescence to middle adulthood by testing the proposition that early developmental task-coping activity predicts later task-coping activity. One hundred forty-six rural high school graduates reported career exploratory activity in 9th grade and 12th grade, occupational choice clarity in 12th grade, and occupational establishment activity 25 years later. Controlling for gender, school grades, and verbosity, occupational choice clarity predicted midcareer establishment activity. The prediction models were somewhat different by gender.
Current career counseling practices are based on certain assumptions about clients and their career development, and these assumptions implicitly reflect male, western European experiences and worldviews. These assumptions may not reflect the general life priorities and specific role commitments of many women of color and White women. An ecological perspective on career counseling is proposed to conceptualize the dynamic interaction between the person and the environment. This perspective holds promise for assisting career counselors in their work with women of color and White women.
The authors investigated the relationship among clients' intake concerns, intake goals, and career counseling concerns. Results indicated that intake goals focused primarily on resolving D. E. Super's (1957) exploration stage tasks, but concerns included education-related issues and ego dystonic emotions related to work. Intake concerns and goals were not related to the content of career counseling. Implications are discussed.
Career maturity is a useful construct for studying adolescents, but it has limits. Professional counselors need to integrate personality and decision-making style into research on career maturity as well as give more than a passing nod to developmental theory. They cannot study career development at the individual level alone; conte,ut matters and is an integral part of career development. The amount of variance in individual career development accounted for by context and change may be so great that longitudinal research on individuals may not be worthwhile.
Career counselors use occupational information to help clients make informed vocational decisions. They would therefore be likely to benefit from understanding how visual images contained in such materials depict the world of work. A review of the literature on career information, however, reveals a significant lack of study of the visual content of career information materials. By taking account of visual images contained in career information resources, counselors can help clients to more effectively explore imagined versus known attributes of potential career-related environments. Several avenues for future research are explored.
This study explored the differences in coping strategies and styles between students who made congruent, incongruent, and undecided college major choices. The coping strategies were operationally defined by the Ways of Coping Questionnaire (WCQ; Folkman & Lazarus, 1988) and the Coping Inventory (CI; Zeitlin, 1985). Congruent, incongruent, and undecided college major choice groups were defined operationally using the Self-Directed Search (SDS; Holland, 1985b) and the College Majors Finder (CMF; Rosen, Holmberg, & Holland, 1989). The Holland codes that resulted from the SDS and the CMF defined the congruent and incongruent students using the Iachan congruence index. The multivariate analysis of variance revealed significant findings for the main effect of gender on the WCQ. On the CI, the multivariate analysis of variance again revealed a main effect for gender. In general, the findings of this study suggest that male and female students report some different coping strategies and styles. Follow-up tests further suggest a few group differences among the congruent, incongruent, and undecided students.
The present intervention outcome study proposed a specific difference in how intervening with the Vocational Card Sort versus the Strong/Strong-Campbell would be experienced by clients. The study included a participant attribute variable (locus of control for career development) and an outcome variable (career decision-making self-efficacy) related to this proposed difference. There were no statistically significant intervention or intervention by participant attribute effects at follow-up time. Nevertheless, there were statistically significant differences in satisfaction at various points in the administration of the interest interventions. Implications for career counseling and future research are discussed.
This is not a boring, sterile review. Neither is it exhaustive, unbiased, or genteel. My aspiration was to write an interesting, informative, and forthright article that would encourage career counselors to continue their education by reading the original books and articles discussed herein. The praise I expressed is genuine, as is the criticism. My intent was to explain what I found useful, thoughtful, helpful-or not not. My hope is that those who read this review will appreciate my viewpoints. I do not expect everyone, however, to subscribe to my positions for, surely, controversy and eclecticism may hone the critical and creative thinking necessary to move career counseling and development forward into the next millennium.
This article discusses the use of career self-efficacy theory in counseling individuals having low career-related self-efficacy.
The article's 1st section provides an overview of the historical development of career counseling in the Philippines from an economic-political perspective. The 2nd section raises current challenges and concerns, highlighting the need for a career counseling model that would address, among other things, Filipinos' valued characteristics of close family ties and desire for economic progress.
Although China has a long history of vocational guidance, it is functionally at a beginning stage in career development and counseling because of the historical vagaries of its political leadership. Vocational guidance and career counseling services, as a professional field, are now rapidly being developed to meet the growing need of Chinese society. M. Pope's (1995, 2000) social transitions stage model is applied to the development of career counseling in China. In particular, this article addresses historic and current trends in the economy and labor market in China and their profound impact on the development of career counseling.
In a period of business downsizing, older workers are at risk for unemployment. They often have difficulty finding suitable replacement jobs and frequently face emotional and financial distress. Employers, as well as older workers, may have perceptions and concerns that can create barriers to reemployment. Older workers are a valuable asset in the labor market. Their plight affects society as a whole. Counselors should be aware of work related issues of order workers, career theories and supporting research pertaining to this unique population, and suitable interventions with which to help older adults make smooth career and life transitions.
The authors respond to Duane Brown's (2000) claims about the deficiencies of person-environment, social learning, developmental, and social cognitive theories as templates for studying and promoting the work transition of racial/ethnic minority students. They (a) suggest that the degree to which theories are generalizable across cultures and subcultures is an empirical question, not a matter to be decided by fiat; (b) counsel against the assumption that cultures exert uniform effects on the career behavior of their members; (c) consider certain mischaracterizations of the career theories; and (d) entertain the possibility that work transition may be studied from the perspective of both generic and culture-specific career theories.
This article reviews Literature published in 1997 related to career counseling and career development. The authors' review revealed that researchers and practitioners continue to productively contribute to a dynamic understanding of career-related issues. The literature was organized into 4 sections: career development throughout the life span, cultural and contextual factors, issues related to assessment, and theoretical advances.
The National Career Development Association's (NCDA) Professional Standards Committee (1997) has recently identified 11 competency areas (career development theory, individual and group counseling skills, individual and group assessment, information resources, and program management and implementation, consultation, diverse populations, supervision, ethical legal issues, and research evaluation, and technology). These competencies were used as categories for classifying research on career development and counseling published in 1996. Two primary areas of research activity were identified: making career counseling theory useful for more clients, and emphasizing the role of contextual factors in shaping career development. Four competency areas not addressed sufficiently by researchers were also identified: consultation, supervision, technology, and ethics. Implications for practice and future research are discussed.
Individual behavior, career guidance theory and practice, and public policy are interdependent, and they are interactive with the characteristics of the ecological context. Each of these constructs is examined.
The authors describe how their participation in a doctoral-level career counseling practicum has influenced their perceptions of the relationship between career and personal counseling, attitudes toward career services, and career interventions skills.
To commemorate the 90th anniversary of the National Career Development Association and to anticipate its centennial, this special issue presents 9 analyses of the career counseling profession's strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (SWOT). On the basis of SWOT analyses and using the methodology explained in this introductory article, the authors present objectives and strategies for advancing the profession in the next decade. The special issue concludes with an analysis of the analyses that reviews and integrates the authors' recommendations and suggestions for constructing the future of the profession.
The purpose of this study was to determine if work ethic differed for a sample of 152 selected 9th-grade students categorized by risk of school failure and by gender. Work ethic attributes were measured using the Occupational Work Ethic Inventory (Petty, 1993). Results of a two-way multivariate analysis of variance indicated significant work ethic differences in main effects of at-risk classification and gender for dependent variables of interpersonal skills, initiative, and being dependable. Interaction effects were not significant. Underlying constructs indicated that adolescents with greater degrees of risk were less dependable and that girls in the study were more dependable than boys.
This article reports a qualitative study of the incidence of Holland codes in three generations of one family over a 10-year time span. The stability of codes was very high whether or not the codes were consistent. Compatibility indexes between family members and significant others were wide-ranging. The gradual changes in Holland codes over three generations seem to reflect the movement of this family from a rural, farm background to suburban settings.
This article describes the adaptation of two interest inventories translated into English, based on Roe's (1956) classification of occupations. In an analysis based on the responses of 181 participants, the items followed the 6 rules for interest inventory items formulated by Meir and Gati (1981). The Cronbach alpha reliability of the 8 field scores in the 2 inventories ranged between .73 and .91. A Smallest Space Analysis (SSA) on 8 field scores on the Ramak, 8 field scores on the Courses and 6 personality type scores on Holland's (1973) Vocational Preference Inventory (VPI) supported the construct validity of the inventories.
This commentary discusses the articles in the special section, ''Adolescent Career Development in Social Context.'' Initially, common and integrative themes are identified and explicated based on the diverse perspectives of the work role in adolescence that were evident in these five articles. In addition, the theoretical frameworks provided by life-span, career development relational perspectives are discussed as possible means of integrating some of the findings presented by the authors of these articles. This article concludes with an observation on how the findings reported in the special section can inform career development scholarship and practice in the next millennium.
Compromise is a significant component of career decisions as well as many other personal decisions. This article presents a conceptual model for dealing with career compromise and discusses its implications for the career counseling process. The mode identifies three possible framings that individuals may adopt when facing compromise. Specifically, compromise may be framed in terms of career alternatives, the importance of different aspects, and within-aspect preferences. The distinctions among the three framings have distinct implications for the career decision-making process, Suggestions are discussed far relevant intervention options aimed at decreasing the potentially harmful effects of the need to compromise.
The study describes the ways in which race and gender shaped the career transitions of Black women lawyers, whose careers were affected by the opportunities generated by the Civil Rights Movement during the decade between 1973 and 1983. The author concludes that although the affirmative action policies and programs that diminished discrimination at the entry level of the profession dramatically increased the number of Black women lawyers during the period of study, a ''Plexiglass ceiling'' limited their choices. Their careers have been influenced negatively by both race and gender, which circumscribed their opportunities to practice in high status, powerful, and financially remunerative sectors of the profession.
This article describes Donald Super's construct of adaptability and reviews research on the construct. The review is followed by a discussion of related counseling research that uses the construct, and research in the area of organizational psychology that addresses the concept but does not use the term. The author summarizes other approaches to the need for adaptability in adult career development, and finally, presents suggestions for practitioners.
Past research has found that characteristics associated with giftedness make career decisions difficult for gifted youth. This study investigated the difficulties experienced by gifted youth and the factors they consider as they make career decisions. Interviews were conducted with 30 gifted adolescents at three strategic decision-making points. A content analysis of the interview transcripts found 20 factors that gifted adolescents identified as important to their career decisions. These factors clustered into five groups: (a) sensitivity to others' expectations, (b) perfectionism, (c) developmental issues, (d) superior intelligence, and (e) multipotentiality. Sensitivity to others' expectations and perfectionism were the factors considered most frequently. Implications of the findings include preventive work with parents and teachers of gifted youth, use of career role models and exploratory work experiences, and research into the actual expectations held for gifted youth by the adults who influence them.
Campbell and Fiske's (1959) multi-trait, multi-method analysis was applied to three popular measures of career development. College students' completed the Attitude Scale of the Career Maturity Inventory (Crites, 1978a), the Vocational Preference Inventory (Holland, 1978), and the Decision-Making Scale of the Career Development Inventory (Super, Thompson, Lindeman, Jordaan, & Myers, 1981). Participants also took part in a structured interview to assess their career development. The table of multi-trait, multi-method correlation coefficients for the three measures of career development supported their construct validity. Implications and ideas for future research are discussed.
This study explored women's experiences of group process in a career planning intervention, and the relationship of those experiences to vocational maturity. We used goal instability as the dependent variable to describe the psychological states and needs of career-undecided women (n = 99), and we used Yalom's model of group process to identify group process factors and their influence on levels of goal instability at posttest and follow-up interviews 2 months later. Results indicated that affective components of group process in career counseling groups.
This article outlines one innovative approach by which school counselors can reinforce students' learning of important career information.
The authors summarize the presentations and discussions contributed to the symposium International Perspectives on Career Development by members of Group 5, who considered the topic of the structure and organization of career development programs in different nations. A capsule picture of the national setting, primary goals, components, objectives, and implementation strategies is presented. Papers fell largely into 4 categories: national programs with several components; large, but more specific programs, serving a national population; smaller programs serving diverse populations; and focused programs. One theme emerged strongly from virtually every presentation: There is a gap, often profound, between policy or vision and reality. Although every nation about which participants heard had laudable policies and had made genuine attempts to assist its people with life career development, many individuals do not have access to quality, or even any, services.
A model graduate training curriculum that emphasizes the counselor's role in assisting clients in the effective use of computer-assisted career guidance (CACG) systems is described. This 4-module graduate training program emphasizes client readiness and exploration using CACG systems, skill building and simulation exercises, and service learning with career clients. The study is evaluated from the perspectives of counselor educators, counselor trainees, and career clients. Findings from 4 institutions support the efficacy of a model curriculum for graduate training and the beneficial outcomes of using CACG systems under appropriate conditions.
The authors examined the relative contributions of both proximal and distal supports to the career interests and vocational self-efficacy in a multiethnic sample (N = 139) of middle school adolescents. Consistent with Social Cognitive Career Theory, it was found that (a) vocational self-efficacy and career planning/exploration efficacy consistently predicted young adolescents' career interests across Holland (J. L. Holland, D, R. Whitney, N. S. Cole, & J. M. Richards, 1969) themes; (b) gender and career gender-typing predicted interests in Realistic, Investigative, and Social careers; and (c) perceived parent support accounted for 29% to 43% of the total unique variance in vocational self-efficacy for all Holland theme careers.
Rapid changes in the world of work coupled with changes in individuals' needs necessitate career counseling assistance, The Oakland University Adult Career Counseling Center uses the services of counseling students to offer career advising to community adults at no charge. The center and its approach are described, along with brief examples of typical clients.
The Adult Career Concerns Inventory (ACCI) uses an attitudinal item-response scale to measure the planning attitudes dimension of career adaptability. This study examined the psychometric properties of the ACCI when used with a behavioral item-response scale. Results supported the hypothesized unidimensionality of the ACCI-B Exploration subscales, which related as expected to vocational identity, need for occupational information, career choice certainty, and career indecision. Using a behavioral ACCI item-response scale, in addition to an attitudinal one, may provide counselors with important information when working with client's making an initial career choice.
Process-oriented case analyses, which are the natural next step in understanding career interventions, are beginning to reveal subtle process changes across sessions. In this case, a 37-year-old physical therapist, who expressed dissatisfaction with her current position, participated in 8 sessions of individual career counseling with an experienced doctoral-level career psychologist. The Possible Selves Questionnaire (PSQ; Markus, 1987), the Symptom 90-R Checklist (Derogatis, 1983), and the Career Decision Scale (Osipow, 1987) were administered at pretesting, after 4 sessions, and at posttesting. Four client- and 2 counselor-process measures were also administered following each session. Results revealed expected changes in traditional outcome measures, and an increase followed by a decrease in future possible selves. Anxiety and vocational information seeking followed a sine-shaped pattern, and sleep disturbance increased at midcounseling and posttesting. Session depth and smoothness were highest when anxiety and information seeking were lowest. These findings, which coincide with other case study results, were integrated using an activation theory model of career intervention in which moderate anxiety serves as a motivator for constructive behavior change.
The aim of this article was to examine the nature of career problems, drawing out common features that pervade any particular instance. On the basis of this commonality, a common standard for career counseling theory, research, and practice was proposed. The significance of identifying a common standard is that the field is so diverse in theory and practice that there appears to be little basis for unifying perspective. Without a common standard or measure, there is no coherent way to judge theoretical or practical progress.
This article discusses the influence of culture on four stages of vocational assessment. The article reviews the role culture plays in problem clarification, information gathering, understanding the problem, and coping with the problem. Issues in the use of standardized tests across cultures are addressed, and research on cross-cultural interest assessment is highlighted.
The author presents a theory of career development drawing on nonlinear dynamics and chaos and complexity theories. Career is presented as a complex adaptive entity, a fractal of the human entity. Characteristics of complex adaptive entities, including (a) autapiesis, or self-regeneration; (b) open exchange; (c) participation in networks; (d) fractals; (e) phase transitions between order and chaos; (f) search for fitness peaks; (g) nonlinear dynamics; (h) sensitive dependence; (i) attractors that limit growth; (j) the role of strange attractors in emergence; and (k) spirituality, are described and then applied to careers. The article concludes with a brief case analysis and implications for practice and research.
This article discusses the 9 analyses of the career Counseling profession's strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats that appear in this September 2003 special issue of ne Career Development Quarterly. The author identifies points of convergence, proposes a mission statement, and summarizes what career counselors seem intent on doing in the coming years. The analysts recommended that the career counseling profession concentrate on 8 objectives: advancing theory that is more holistic, contextual, and multicultural; using accumulated research more effectivly; focusing focusing new research on the career Counseling process; exploiting technology to construct new tools; ameliorating career Counseling training; expanding the National Career Development Association's role; increasing advocacy about public policy; and fostering the international growth of the profession.
The development of career counseling in Taiwan during the last 40 years suggests priorities for future development. Although many of the basic constructs of career counseling are used in Taiwan, cultural differences are also apparent. At the earliest stage of career development in Taiwan (1960-1980), career guidance was managed through vocational centers and government agencies. The focus was almost exclusively on school-aged youth seeking employment. At the middle stage (19801990), the terms for career counseling were being translated into Chinese, and trained Career Counselors were returning from study abroad. The emphasis was primarily on educational systems. At the present stage (1990-present), career counseling was provided to adults outside the school setting and corporations were organizing their own career counseling services. The future presents many conflicts between Western and Asian values, traditional or modern demands, and self or family interests. Technological advances in testing and information sciences provide opportunities and problems for career counselors.
The authors investigated the stability of the published Sixteen Personality Factor Questionnaire-Fifth Edition (16PF; S. Conn & M, Rieke, 1994) predictors in predicting Holland types as measured by the Self-Directed Search (SDS; J. Holland, B. Fritzsche, & A. Powell, 1994). Because the majority of the published regression equations contained unstable predictors, the authors developed modified multiple regression equations using the more stable predictors. However, these equations, although statistically significant, shared less than 50% of the variance with the criterion variable, suggesting limited practical utility or support for the domain overlap of the 16PF and the SDS. The authors recommend that the SDS be used when a measure of SDS types is needed.
The authors identify and describe occupational career patterns (OCPs) over 25 years for a single grade cohort of 170 rural high school graduates. OCP is the sequence of 1 person's work positions during the adolescent and adult years; a Stable OCP is experienced by persons engaged in the same type of occupation over their entire working career, More than one third of the respondents experienced Stable OCPs. Men experience greater OCP stability than women. OCP stability is linked to lower midlife career and job satisfaction, independent of the early experiences of socioeconomic status and gender.
The authors introduce the Career-in-Culture Interview (CiCI), a flexible, semistructured interview protocol designed for the career counseling intake session. The contents of the CiCI are based on recent theoretical advances in multicultural counseling and on the social cognitive model of career development. The authors describe a pilot evaluation of the interview and present guidelines for using the CiCI in practice.
The special June 1999 issue of The Career Development Quarterly that dealt with school to-work transitions was an admirable attempt to link theory to practice. However, both the theories used and the practices suggested failed to take into account the special concerns of cultural minorities. Suggestions for improving theory and practice to make them more culturally sensitive are made in this reaction.
This article draws from the life-span, life-space model (Super, 1980, 1990) of career development to examine the definition of adaptive decision making. First, the existing definition of adaptive decision making as ''rational'' decision making is reviewed. Next, alternate perspectives on decision making are offered with an emphasis on the implications for deciding in a life-span, life-space context. Finally, suggestions are made for future directions in theory, research, and practice.
This article describes a 1-hour workshop designed to orient students to a career resource center and assist them with career decision making.
This article traces the influence of Donald E. Super in introducing the concept of work values into career development and vocational theory. It reviews the conceptualization, taxonomy, and assessment of work values. Research bearing on Super's ''onion model,'' representing his views on the relationship of work values to other variables in the affective domain, is also presented. Finally, an overview is given of the research evidence regarding any functional role that work values actually play in the career development of individuals.
Erikson's construct of identity has received much attention in the contemporary literature on adolescent development (e.g., Archer, 1989a, 1989b; Blustein & Palladino, 1991). In the vocational literature Bordin (1984) and Holland (1985) have made significant efforts to incorporate a construct of vocational identity into their theories. Although most contributors to the career development literature has acknowledged Erikson as the intellectual father of the construct of identity, none have succeeded in formulating a construct of identity that is more than a caricature of Erikson's thinking. In this article, I suggest that what is needed is a serious look at the requirements for formulating a viable, dynamic, developmental conceptualization of the construct of vocational identity.
The authors explored predictions of general job satisfaction at early and middle adulthood and uncovered several findings about developmental processes associated with job satisfaction. Tests of life-span career theory propositions revealed that neither choice-job congruence nor gender added significantly to predictions of job satisfaction at 2 career stages. Earlier occupational choice and current job added to predictions of midcareer (modal age 43 years) job satisfaction, especially for men. The predictability of job satisfaction is apparently influenced by the career stage when satisfaction is appraised.
The authors assessed the reliability and validity of the Web-based version of the Career Key (L. K. Jones, 1997). Ninety-nine undergraduates completed the Web-based version of the Career Key and the Self-Directed Search-Form R (J. L. Holland, 1994) in counterbalanced order and completed a second Career Key administration 2 weeks after completing the first test administration. Test-retest reliability ranged between .75 and .84. With the exception of the Conventional scale (.47), all concurrent validity coefficients were at or above .65.
The rationale for policy interest in career development services and the way in which this rationale is being strengthened by the current transformations in work and career are discussed. The potential roles of public policy in relation to career development services are explored, along with ways in which such services can influence the policy-making process. A range of policy issues related to making career development services available to all throughout life are identified. Stronger structures and processes are needed to bring together career development practitioners with policy makers and other stakeholder interests in order to address tasks of common concern.
This article describes potential contributions of theories of person-environment fit to understanding of the transition from school to work. The authors review basic assumptions of person-environment fit theories and how the theories can be applied to the school-to-work transition. An earlier version of this article was presented by the senior author at the 1997 annual meeting of the American Psychological Association, Chicago, Illinois.
In this multiple regression model, self-efficacy beliefs are the best predictor of career indecision, and outcome expectations are the best predictor of exploration intentions. when indecision was entered as a predictor, it also was a significant predictor of exploration intentions-students who were less decided were also more likely to plan career exploration. Career efficacy and outcome expectations relate significantly more strongly within the group of college men than within the group of college women. Implications for social cognitive career theory and practice are discussed.
Analyses of 14 videotaped parent-adolescent career conversations reveal the socially constructed nature of career. These analyses are used to identify joint actions in career conversations, determine their patterns, and address their meaning for the participants. Joint action refers to the action that people take together or that occurs between them. The participants used 3 superordinate joint actions (struggle, exploration, and negotiation) and several subordinate joint actions. Three patterns of joint actions were also identified The joint actions had particular meaning for both career and the relationship between the participants.
Elements of an expanded construct of adolescent vocational identity were examined in terms of their interrelationships with each other, as well as relationships with preferences among leisure, school, and work activities, engagement in those activities, and identity status, Investigating a sample of 660 7th through 12th graders, we found that vocational interests, or occupational self-efficacy, and occupational prestige were closely associated with each other with school acid leisure interests, and with actual engagement in corresponding (exploratory) activities. We also found that adolescents did not draw significant, distinctions between leisure, school, and work activities. The role: of school end vocational exploration in adolescents' self-chosen vocational identity is discussed.
Building on the recent contributions of Donald Super (e.g., 1980), this article presents a broadened lens with which to view theory, research, and practice in career exploration. Super's contributions on career adaptability and the life-career rainbow (e.g., Super, 1990; Super & Knasel, 1981) were applied to current areas of ambiguity in the career exploration literature, yielding potentially useful ideas about the antecedents and consequences of career exploration. Based on an integrative analysis guided by Super's recent contributions and related conceptual innovations, a context-rich perspective is proposed to broaden the attentional focus of discourse about career exploration. The article discusses the theoretical implications of the context-rich view and provides suggestions for counseling practice.
This article provides an overview of a social cognitive framework for understanding career interest, choice, and performance processes. Derived primarily from Bandura's (1986) general social cognitive theory, the framework features several variables (self-efficacy, outcome expectations, personal goals) through which people help to guide their own career development. It also includes a discussion of how these variables interrelate with other aspects of persons (e.g., gender) and their environments (e.g., supports, barriers) within the process of career development. The framework is intended as a base both for unifying existing career theories and for conceptualizing developmental and remedial career interventions.
The importance of client beliefs in career counseling depends on their ability to add unique information about the client over and above that contributed by aptitudes and interests. The Career Beliefs Inventory was administered to 200 Australian students in grade 10 together with measures of Holland's RIASEC interest themes and scholastic aptitudes. The correlations between scales from the three domains showed clearly that beliefs made a contribution distinct from that provided by aptitudes and interests. Even though the results may reflect possible sampling or method variance, career beliefs in this sample added unique information to that traditionally used in career counseling.
Donald E. Super's work to linguistically explicate and operationally define career development and its central processes has strongly influenced how counselors throughout the world comprehend and guide their clients' vocational behavior. Starting at midcentury, Super conceptualized career development in terms of life stages and developmental tasks. He proposed that counselors measure career maturity, globally, by comparing chronological age with developmental task being encountered, and that they measure career maturity, specifically, by identifying the coping methods used in facing a task. Super advanced counselors' abilities to understand and counsel adolescents who are trying to specify educational and vocational choices by explaining the importance of career choice readiness and by devising measures of career maturity. To complement the construct of maturation as the central process in adolescent career development, Super proffered the construct of adaptability as the central process in adult career development and also devised a measure of this process.
The implicit definitions we give to career and personal counseling reflect a dichotomy between the two areas of research and practice. The field's research focus and counseling trainees' early practice experience probably reinforce the idea that career counseling is prototypically concerned with young adult career choice. A case study of targeted coaching in business is presented to illustrate how career and personal issues are intertwined in adult career adjustment.
In this article the author describes three fictitious university counseling center clients who are struggling with career issues related to their personal development. Suggestions are given regarding ways to conceptualize their situation as well as methods of individualized career guidance.
The nature of career counseling, counseling, and psychotherapy is considered, as is the use of the terms counseling and psychotherapy in the works of Carl Rogers as illustration of the cause of confusion in our terminology. It is suggested here that there are two kinds of counseling, situational and personal, and that these are not dichotomous but rather a continuum.
Based on reasearch involving a sample of 180 school teachers, the determinants and process associated with the intention to change careers was examined using path analysis on data from public school teachers. Overall, the empirical analysis provided support for the model and its causal ordering. However, lack-of-fit components suggested that a more complex model with additional paths might be more appropriate. Implications of the findings for research are discussed.
Most theories of career development have conceptualized normative events, periods, and stages to explain how the careers of men and women unfold. This article conceptualizes career counseling as human development intervention to allow a more differentiated and comprehensive view of normative and nonnormative factors that affect career development.
Family systems propositions as applied to career development theory were tested in a cross-sectional survey examining the relationship between family members' perceptions of family functioning and adolescent career development measures. Results of the analysis showed that family functioning dimensions as evaluated by 11th-grade students and their parents were more frequent and stronger predictors of career development than gender, socioeconomic status, and educational achievement.
Many counselors are aware that synchronicity-unpredictable instances of meaningful coincidence-can play a significant role in career opportunities, yet the phenomenon of synchronicity in the career literature is underrepresented. The purpose of this article is to discuss the occurrence of synchronicity in the career development process. A philosophical context is presented and provides a framework for understanding synchronicity, Through the presentation of 3 case studies, synchronistic themes are explored, Using various career counseling processes, each client developed an authentic identity and found meaningful work through an experience with synchronicity, Implications for counselors are discussed.
Career guidance in Singapore schools went through 3 stages of development. The focus in the 1st stage was on information-giving. A curriculum approach was adopted in the 2nd stage when career education became part and parcel of the school curriculum. The 3rd stage saw the integration of career guidance with information technology and the shift of the role of the career teachers from expert to facilitator. To meet the challenges of the new millennium, there is a need to train professional career counselors, develop indigenous resource materials, and promote a new concept of career development among students.
Thirty career counseling interviews were recorded and inductively analyzed using a discourse analytic method. Findings indicate that clients in this setting present various dilemmatic themes of career in their talk. Three types of dilemmas were pervasive: uncertainty versus certainty, interests versus practical, and focus versus options. The findings suggest that career theorists and practitioners might find it useful to address the dilemmatic processes evident in career talk.
In discussions about the effects of part-time work on adolescents, career development processes have received little attention. This study examined relationships between part-time work and two components of career development (work values and career indecision) in 483 high school students. Comparisons of longitudinal and cross-sectional data revealed that peripheral work aspects were less valued as a consequence of being involved in part-time work; thus, the relative value placed on central work aspects increased. However, part-time work did not affect career indecision. The decision of whether to work seemed unrelated to the preexisting career development status, except for the value placed on physical activity in boys.
Hope is important in the career development of at-risk youth. A 1-day Ropes Course, designed to increase hope, was incorporated into a summer jobs program for this population. The Ropes Course used individual and group activities that challenged the participants to overcome obstacles and achieve predetermined goals. Program evaluation data, including the Hope Scale and a thought-listing activity, indicated that the participants experienced an increase in hope after the Ropes Course.
This article extends social cognitive career theory by suggesting how several of its major hypotheses can be applied to counseling persons with career choice difficulties. Several theory-derived counseling strategies are described that can be used to assist clients in developing a broad array of career options, analyzing and overcoming barriers to career choice, and counteracting choice-limiting self-efficacy beliefs. Each strategy is illustrated with a case example. Future research needs related to the counseling model are discussed.
This article outlines a values-based approach to facilitating career transitions. Values provide standards of behavior. People who are unable to engage in work that they deem important violate their standards of behavior and are likely to be dissatisfied with their jobs. Moreover,workers whose values are at variance with those of their supervisors are likely to have differing views of the relative importance of various aspects of the job. If a worker emphasizes aspects of the job that he or she views as important as opposed to those seen as important by the supervisor, low performance appraisals are likely. This may lead to planned or unplanned transitions because of termination Career counselors can use the approach discussed in this article to facilitate both types of transitions.
In this review, the influence of social and work roles are incorporated into a model of retirement adjustment, along with two psychological moderators that may aid the retirement transition. These psychological resources, locus of control and retirement self-efficacy, are those behavioral predispositions that would lead one to engage in proactive strategies for mastering the role changes inherent in the retirement transition. The implications of social and work-related role changes and psychological resources for retirement planning and adjustment are discussed.
This article describes Super's construct of role salience, and recent literature on gender issues in multiple roles that supports the wisdom of his basic ideas. Gender influences how individuals perceive various roles, role priorities and involvements over time, and role juggling during adulthood. Whether or not men and women report key roles as similarly salient; how they define, enact, and manage these roles may differ substantially. Personal variations in life careers remind counselors to explore clients' own life meanings as expressed in roles.
This article gives an overview of research on Super's theory across cultures within the United States as well as internationally. Research indicates that the theory has some cross-cultural validity, yet there seem to be measurement concerns. The article also discusses two areas for future investigation: development of ethnic identity as a vocational task and research on developmental contextualism (Vondracek, Lerner, & Shulenberg, 1986).
This study investigated self-esteem and career salience of institutionalized adolescent offenders in the context of Super's (1980) lifespan career development theory. Participants were 185 male adolescents. Results indicated that participation, commitment, and values expectations in home-family roles contribute significantly to self-esteem in adolescent offenders. Additionally, adolescent offenders differ from adolescent non-offenders on home-family and work roles, with adolescent offenders scoring higher. Implications for career counseling of institutionalized adolescent offenders for transition into the community are discussed.
This article provides a selected review of two lines of recent research on career exploration, with a specific focus on applications for counseling practice. The first line of research deals with identifying the antecedents of exploratory activity focusing on the role of internal factors in motivating self- and environmental exploration. The second line of research addresses the application of information processing biases to career exploration. The article describes relevant counseling interventions that are derived from recent theory and research and concludes with a summary of six goals to consider in designing career exploration interventions for individual and group counseling.
The purpose of this investigation was to examine ethnic group and social class differences in 401 college students' career development. Assessments of career development included career decision-making attitudes, vocational congruence, and career decision-making skills. Statistical analyses did not reveal any social class differences in career development. Ethnic group differences, however, were observed, including significant differences in career decision-making attitudes and vocational congruence (p < .001). Findings suggest that current theories of career development are lacking in their application to today's ethnically diverse college population. Future directions for cross-cultural career development research and implications for career counselors are discussed.
Structured, focused group interviews (focus groups) provide the opportunity to assess the knowledge and experiences of a variety of people with a common interest in a relatively short period of time. Through carefully structured questions and materials as well as planned interactions, a focused situation is created to yield the desired information. This article presents the methodology and results of the focus group interviews conducted as part of an evaluation of the Career Information System of Iowa. The advantages and disadvantages of focus groups and additional applications to career development program planning and evaluation are discussed.
Despite many changes that have occurred in the field of career counseling, counselors continue to rely on models of counseling that emphasize the rational, informational aspects of career decision making. The author argues that career counselors need to pay more attention to the affective, psychological issues confronting clients with career problems. The impact of significant psychological variables that influence career decision making are discussed: developmental stages and tasks, identity formation and status, self-concept, psychological needs, and internal barriers.
This article traces the author's emotional journey of a job search, from finding what seems to be the perfect position to being turned down for the job. It is intended to remind counselors, employers, and job seekers of the emotional side of a process that is often seen as a simple series of rational, cognitive, and carefully planned steps.
The author examines the role of values in the career decision-making process and describes Depth-Oriented Values Extraction (DOVE) as a process that translates various types of psychological data (e.g., Holland-type themes) into values-based terms and language that facilitate career decision making. The author presents a case study to demonstrate the implications of DOVE for career counseling and makes suggestions for counselors.
The current challenges confronting career counselors require increased discourse regarding career counseling models. Some authors have initiated this discourse, but more participants are needed. The need also exists to communicate more aggressively the special expertise that career counselors bring to their work. As career counselors construct contemporary intervention models, they will need to engage in action research to demonstrate accountability and to document that their services are effective. Career counselors can embrace these activities by building on past practices to construct a vision for the future.
Career development theory provides a comprehensive model for conceptualizing the school-to-work transition. Since the 1920s, this model has guided the design of a plethora of career education methods and materials that orient, teach, coach, and rehearse students for the transition from school to work. The developmental model, methods, and materials aim to increase students' awareness of the choices to be made and the information and planning that bears on these choices.
The Adaptive Success Identity Plan (ASIP) uses the construct of success identity as the core of a career intervention program. Three empirical studies (N > 2,000) explored the success identity construct and its application in a structured career intervention. Study 1 provided reliability and validity evidence of the measures. Study 2 indicated that programming efforts targeting family involvement, self-efficacy, and stress and time management should enhance a number of college outcomes. Study 3 found that students who received the ASIP intervention were more likely to use the success identity construct in defining their role in college success. This monograph examines two issues related to constructing effective life transition programs for college students. First, a theoretical metamodel based on Developmental Systems Theory (DST; Ford & Lerner, 1992) and a theoretical model drawn from social cognitive theory (Bandura, 1986), diathesis-stress models, and social integration theory (Tinto, 1987) provides the rationale for how to successfully build transition programs. Second, the Adaptive Success identity Plan (ASIP) illustrates how the theoretical framework can be applied to facilitating college students' transitions. Section I introduces DST as the framework guiding transition programming. This section highlights self-identity as the unit of analysis and provides a case study exploring the difficulty of changing self-identity without active environmental intervention. Section II introduces theoretical constructs associated with promoting successful transitions. These constucts were drawn from social cognitive theory (Bandura, 1986), diathesis-stress models, and social integration theory (Tinto, 1987). Section III provides validation for the success identity construct (Study 1). Section IV introduces ASIP as a comprehensive college intervention program designed to build success identities and thereby enhancing college outcomes. Section TV includes an overview of ASIP, application of developmental systems theory, and describes the range of systemic applications. Section V evaluates the effectiveness of the constructs to predict college outcomes and the effectiveness of ASIP in producing success identities. Finally, Section VI explores future directions for research and :intervention programming.
Careers education and guidance work in Britain over the past 80 years is set out as a narrative. At each stage there are questions about why preferred actions are preferred. The author provides explanations in terms of both developing theoretical and policy rationales for action.
Older adults, who represent an increasing proportion of the population, face a major challenge in the adjustment to retirement. Nearly one third of older adults experience difficulty in making this adjustment (Atchley, 1975). Atchley's (1975) theory of adjustment to retirement and relevant empirical data are examined. It is argued that reactions to retirement are diverse and multifaceted. Specific counseling interventions and barriers to counseling older adults are suggested.
College students (1,039) in three different countries ranked 24 occupations according to social status, as they perceived it existing in their respective societies. The selected occupations were first used by Counts in 1925. There was more agreement than disagreement in the rankings, although exceptions were noted and explained by local conditions. If social status is a determining factor in occupational choice, this cross-cultural study may be useful in examining differences and similarities among college students in different parts of the world.
The author highlights information for career counselors to consider when addressing work-family interface with individuals who are members of same-sex, dual-earner couples or families. D. E. Super's (1990) life-span, life-space theory is the framework used to organize the literature review and discussion of current trends. Issues related to the roles of worker, partner, parent, stepparent, and caregiver are discussed. Suggestions are provided for career counselors.
The authors used a content analysis system to classify career-counseling participants' responses to questions about the helpfulness of their recently completed counseling experiences. Both clients and counselors most frequently identified client gains associated with self-exploration and with emotional support as most helpful. Members of both groups frequently identified ineffective counselor-selected activities as least helpful. Clients rated their experiences as significantly more effective than did their counselors. The authors discuss implications of these results for the validity of the content analysis system and the nature and practice of career counseling.
This article applies a cognitive information processing approach to career problem solving and decision making to the specific process of employment problem solving and decision making, Definitions and accompanying employment examples are followed by an exploration of the nature of employment problems. Content and process dimensions are described by applying information processing concepts to employment problem solving and decision making. Examples of positive and negative cognitions that have an impact on the effectiveness of employment problem solving and decision making are also provided.
This article conceptualizes the case of jessica Chang from a cross-cultural perspective. The article also suggests additional readings in cross-cultural counseling, and specifically focuses on cross-cultural career counseling The case is examined from the viewpoint of Jessica Chang, her supervisor, and the that of her organization as a whole. Practical implications for each participant are discussed.
This study examined whether variation on the cultural constructs of individualism-collectivism in a sample of predominantly majority culture (i.e., Anglo American) college students accounts for significant amounts of variance in their occupational choices, career plans, and work values. Participants (135 women, 55 men) responded to the ''I am'' sentence completion method (Kuhn & McPartland, 1954), the Occupational Plans Questionnaire (Hershenson, 1967), and the Work Values Inventory (Super, 1970). Overall, results indicated no significant relationships between level of collectivism and the career-related variables.
The study interpreted scores from career development and role salience measures for 4 groups of underrepresented, at-risk college students to suggest potentially useful career interventions for each group. Each group's scores required a distinctive interpretation, and the 4 interpretations suggested some common and some distinctive interventions. Because the recommendations obtained from the career measures coincided with recommended interventions for underrepresented, at-risk students in the literature, the results support further study of the utility of career maturity measures with such populations.
This article discusses the recent phenomenon of older career changers and highlights some of the strengths and proactive strategies for such people. Issues include dealing realistically with negative perceptions and stressing advantages of the mature career changer.
Researchers have compiled an extensive body of literature on the factors that influence the traditionality, or the gender typical nature, of women's career choices. However, little has been written about the variables that might influence men to enter gender atypical occupations. This study tested L. H. Chusmir's (1990) model of men's nontraditional occupationaf choice, using a longitudinal sample of college-age men in both gender traditional and nontraditional occupations. Liberal social attitudes, degree aspirations at Time 2, and socioeconomic status were directly predictive of nontraditional career choice, whereas the importance of a prestigious career at Time 1 and academic ability had an indirect influence on whether a traditional career choice was made.
The authors present a 3-stage model - Prescreening, In-depth exploration, and Choice (PIC) - aimed at increasing the quality of the career decision-making process and its outcome. PIC provides a framework for a dynamic and interactive process that emphasizes the role of career counselors as decision counselors, whose aim is to facilitate an active decision-making process. The proposed model offers the advantages of systematic, analytical processing, while remaining compatible with individuals' natural way of thinking. The authors outline the implementation of PIC, discuss the role of intuition in decision making, and compare the PIC with the person-environment fit approach.
This article provides a rationale and interdisciplinary framework for integrating work and other dimensions of life by (a) reviewing relevant changes in society and the career development and counseling profession, (b) describing one holistic career-planning model called Integrative Life Planning (ILP), based on 6 interactive critical life tasks, and (c) discussing questions and issues surrounding narrow versus broad approaches to life planning. ILP includes a strong emphasis on career counselors as advocates and change agents. It focuses on several kinds of wholeness, integrative thinking, democratic values, and helping clients make career decisions not only for self-satisfaction but also for the common good.
This discussion presents a business and industry perspective on Jessica Chang's career. Jessica's career issues are analyzed from an organizational perspective and from a career counseling perspective, with attention to salient crosscultural counseling issues. The discussion emphasizes actions that organizations can take to anticipate similar situations, and explores how Jessica could have better managed her career development in view of the challenges she encountered.
In this article, recent research using the Work Importance Study (WIS) instruments in English-speaking countries is reviewed. Research results indicate several consistent trends. First, that life-role salience and values must be viewed within specific developmental and cultural contexts. Second, in diverse settings and with different groups, there are sex differences related to the relative importance of life roles and values. Third, career counselors need consider the client's values and life-role salience to facilitate personal development. Recommendations for future research are offered.
Students with disabilities at 2 midwestern universities were surveyed as to their use of campus career-related services, their behavior regarding disability disclosure and accommodations, and their knowledge of ADA (Americans With Disabilities Act, 1990) employment-related guidelines. The results indicate that most students with disabilities do not use existing career development and employment services on campus. Students frequently disclose their disability to a prospective employer; however, students are less likely to request accommodations on the job. These trends may be explained in part by the student's limited knowledge of their employment rights under the ADA.
The thesis of this article is that sufficient and convincing research evidence has accumulated to indicate that a sixth stage of career development-career renewal-occurs for many people between the end of the establishment stage and the beginning of the maintenance stage. This article explains why a renewal stage was overlooked in the 1940s and 1950s, clarifies the meaning of renewal as it applies to career development, compares the transitions of men and women in their early 40s, and offers suggestions for the counseling of clients who are dealing with the task of career renewal.
This discussion of unsolicited but tightly linked articles looks at general and specific themes related to career transitions for adults. A global overview is followed by summaries of each article and a conclusion section. Overall, the articles have much to offer theorists, researchers, and career counselors.
This article proposes parallels between gay, lesbian, and bisexual identity development and the professional development of gay/lesbian/bisexual-affirmative, heterosexual career counselors. This perspective gives a development framework for understanding the changing feelings, thoughts, behaviors, and actions that accompany the professional, personal, and political growth of heterosexual career counselors who are seeking to become affirmative to career and life planning issues associated with sexual orientation.
The Berufsbildertest (Vocational Pictures Technique) is described and its usefulness in career counseling is explained, along with a description of two examples of its use in career assessment.
Preparing students to provide competent career counseling to multicuturally diverse clients requires a systematic and integrated effort by training programs. This article discusses the essential components in a comprehensive, programmatic commitment to multiculturalism, and offers suggestions for enhancing multicultural sensitivity and competence in individual trainees. The definition of multicultural diversity used in this article includes issues in addition to race and ethnicity (e.g., gender, sexual orientation, age, socioeconomic status, and physical disability) and recognizes the diversity of counseling trainees.
This study compared RIASEC college major codes derived from surveying students enrolled in 28 majors, the judgments of subject matter and counseling experts, and workers employed in jobs related to the majors, Of the four methodologies used to obtain college codes, the highest degree of agreement was the 96% between student Career Decision-Making (CDM) codes having reasonably close matches or better with codes in the Dictionary of Holland Occupational Codes. The article discusses that students must be aware that some common major names are not very communicative or descriptive of the predominant code tvpes studying the subject.
The relation of four hypothesized sources of self-efficacy information to high school students' math self-efficacy was explored. Results; indicated that (a) of the hypothesized sources, Prior Performance was the most efficient predictor of self-efficacy; (b) global academic self-concept did not explain unique self-efficacy variation beyond Prior Performance; and (c) the effect of self-efficacy on the perceived utility of math to future life and work plans was mediated by students' math/science interests.
The Self-Directed Search was administered to 68 university seniors who were majoring in Chemistry/Chemical Engineering, Elementary Education, and Office Administration. Their resulting three-letter summary codes were compared with three-letter college major codes obtained from the College Majors Finder. A high degree of agreement between the two sets of codes was found for each of the three majors. Effective methods for matching people to jobs have held the interest and occupied much time for career counselors and vocational theorists since the inception of the trait-factor approach to career counseling. More recently, Holland (1985a) broadened and clarified matching procedures through the development of his typological theory of vocational choice. Just as personality types and occupational environments have been organized using Holland's framework to foster an understanding of occupational choice, Holland's theory can also be used to explain other types of choices, such as choice of a college major.
Within the next 10 years, approximately half of all women will be working outside the home. As more women enter the work force and the number of dual career couples increases, counselors will need to help women explore how work and family issues influence career choices. Little research, however, has examined attitudes related to the sequencing of career and family events. In this current research, results from a survey of 203 individuals were analyzed. It was found that gender, attitudes regarding women's timing of career and children, and women's ability to balance work and family demands were significantly related. Surprisingly, although there was no significant relationship between gender and attitudes toward the timing of marriage and career establishment, there was a relationship between these attitudes and race.
The symposium International Perspectives on Career Development included a plenary session that addressed career counseling in a world of limited resources. Panelists representing diverse areas of the world shared their perspectives on career counseling in their countries and the specific problems they faced. They identified common concerns and prospects for the future of cross-national career counseling in 3 domains: (a) counselor training and human resources, (b) career service delivery practices, and (c) resources and sources of support. Harnessing the energy and capital of the global career counseling community will better equip career development professionals to deal with existing limitations and realize the common goal of the International Association for Educational and Vocational Guidance and the National Career Development Association to internationalize career counseling.
A study of 354 nontraditional college women found robust levels of confidence in their ability to manage the student role and pursue career-related tasks. Findings indicated that perceived career barriers and social support accounted for variance in student and career decision-making self-efficacy for nontraditional college women with and without children. Social support added to the prediction of self-efficacy over and above the contribution of perceived barriers. The discussion focuses on recommendations for career counseling interventions to facilitate educational and vocational success among nontraditional college women.
In this article, the ecological model of career development (E. P. Cook, M. J. Heppner, & K. M. O'Brien, 2002) is applied to a case example. The individual described in the case example faces issues of sexual harassment in the workplace as well as challenges related to being part of a dual-career marriage. The author suggests career counseling strategies and discusses potential barriers to effective counseling.
Services designed to assist job seekers to leave public assistance and gain employment are well established throughout the U.S. Many of these programs are created and delivered by professionals of higher socioeconomic class backgrounds, but many program participants are of lower social class status. This situation can create cross-class difficulties in the design and delivery of effective job-search services. The author argues that using a person-centered perspective, with the deliberate inclusion of genuineness and empathy in all phases of programming, may neutralize cross-class variables and increase the effectiveness of interventions. Examples from programs emphasizing person-centered concepts are offered.
This article begins with a review of the use of readiness assessment measures as a strategy for improving career services. A 5-step process model for readiness assessment is then proposed and current readiness measures are identified. Although considerable research has been conducted on career decision-making readiness and numerous measures have been developed, there has been limited literature available on the application of readiness assessment in selecting career interventions to meet specific client needs. This article continues with a theory-based conceptualization of readiness and then links readiness assessment to the selection of career interventions designed to meet clients' needs.
This article describes the collaborative efforts of the National Career Development Association, National Occupational Information Coordinating Committee, and Career Development Training Institute at Oakland University, which resulted in the emergence and recognition of the important role of career development facilitators (CDFs). The development of the CDF competencies, curriculum, and certification is summarized, and examples of counselor-facilitator collaboration are provided.
Mentoring is being increasingly used by companies as a means of fostering employee learning and development. Limited research exists from the perspective of the mentor on these relationships. This article presents the results of a qualitative study that investigated the characteristics that the ideal mentor should possess and ways that both mentors and proteges can make mentoring relationships most effective. Findings from the study are used to frame suggestions for future research and practice.
Career-Development Assessment and Counseling (C-DAC) systematically bridges career theory and practice. Integrating differential, developmental, and phenomenological methods, the C-DAC model uses a comprehensive career assessment battery to help clients explore their roles, developmental stages and tasks, career attitudes and knowledge, values, and interests within their unique life contexts. The authors recommend elaborating the C-DAC model to formally appraise cultural. identity in step one of the model and to consider cultural identity concerns throughout the C-DAC process. This should help counselors more dearly understand how cultural factors influence people's career development and vocational behavior.
This article relates selected concepts from the general literature of gay and lesbian psychology to the career development of gay men. Specific concerns related to sexual identity development, the management of stigma, and psychological adjustment are reviewed, and suggestions are offered both to practitioners and to researchers.
In the first part of the article, the major findings and the problems of criterion-related validity research in the field of career development assessment are analyzed. Regarding predictive validity, it is shown that it is more difficult to prove medium-term and long-term effects of career maturity on career adjustment than short-term effects, and that this is connected with shortcomings in research and theory. In the second part of the article, empirical evidence is provided for the assumption that self-concept orientation in choice of present major and realization of preferences might function as mediating factors between career development in school and career adjustment.
Ignoring sexual orientation in career counseling practice is presented as a specific case of failing to integrate an aspect of the personal dimension into career counseling. Three case examples illustrate specific actions that career counselors must take to integrate this important aspect of the personal dimension into career counseling. The actions suggested involve three general areas: (a) signaling lesbian and gay affirmation in career counseling practice, (b) enhancing the development of a positive gay or lesbian identity in the context of career development work, and (c) recognizing and integrating the reality of anti-gay stigma in career counseling.
This article discusses the application of repertory grid technique to career counseling. The clients supplied and rated jobs, work or nonwork roles, on a series of individually selected personal constructs, elicited by noting similarities and differences between elements. Results obtained allowed clients to explore personal meanings attributed to the jobs or roles by examining the relationships between elements and constructs. The flexible, comprehensive, and highly individualized nature of repertory grid technique makes it possible for the counselor to enter more readily into the client's frame of reference and assists the client to make sense of past and present experiences as a basis for future career planning and decision making.
This study used Super's (1980) life span career development theory to investigate the relations between self-esteem level, vocational identity, and career salience in high school students. Two hundred fifty-one students were randomly selected from. junior classes in urban, suburban, rural, and vocational schools. Results indicated that high self-esteem students scored significantly higher than low self-esteem students on vocational identity and career salience (participation, commitment, and values expectations) in school and home or family roles, but they did not differ on work, community, or leisure roles. Implications for life span career counseling are discussed.
The early history of the Career Decision Scale (CDS) is reviewed. A team of researchers devised categories of indecision as the basis of a set of cassette audiotapes and an accompanying workbook for self-counseling. Although the self-counseling materials have not been developed, the audiotape scripts evolved into the set of scale items that became the CDS. Three issues raised in the literature are addressed: (a) the lack of information about the instrument's early development, (b) psychometric problems posed by the items, and (c) the use of the CDS as a scale versus a type indicator.
The People's Republic of China (PRC) is in the process of reforming its educational system, and career guidance is one of the innovative strategies being used to make the schools more accountable. For the past 4 years researchers from the University of Victoria (Canada) and East China Normal University (China) have been working on the development of career guidance materials for middle schools. This article examines the results of a career needs assessment of Chinese middle school children, their parents, and teachers by juxtaposing them with a North American (Canadian) sample.
One half of D. Super's (D. Super, M, Savickas, & C. Super, 1996) theoretical propositions that relate to abilities have been operationalized into a psychometric instrument, the Ability Explorer (T Harrington & J. Harrington, 1996). Interpretations illustrate how D, Super's career development theoretical concepts can be implemented in career counseling.
This study examined differences in career decision-making self-efficacy, trait anxiety, and ethnic identity for 687 undergraduates (589 Whites, 98 racial and ethnic minorities). Significant differences by race and major (declared, undeclared) indicated that White students had higher career decision-making self-efficacy and lower trait anxiety, ethnic identity, and other-group orientation. Declared students had higher career decision-making self-efficacy and lower trait anxiety. Ethnic variables (ethnic identity, other-group orientation) were more significant predictors of career decision-making self-efficacy and trait anxiety for racial and ethnic minorities than for Whites. Implications of the findings and directions for future research are discussed.
Gender differences in rural eighth-grade students' curricular, career, and lifestyle expectations were examined. Girls expect to take more math classes in high school, select careers that require a college education, and plan to go to college more frequently than do boys. Boys and girls do not differ in their interest in various careers, although girls prefer occupations that involve people, whereas boys prefer occupations that involve things. Girls plan to work for as many years of their lives as do boys; however, girls are more likely to expect to work part-time, whereas boys expect to work full-time. Counseling implications are offered.
We see the working alliance, a construct well articulated in the psychoanalytic counseling literature, as a key element in enhancing the counseling of those with career concerns. This article decribes the working alliance as that sector of the overall experience of counseling participants characterized by their collaboration, mutuality and cooperation with regard to the work of counseling. The dimensions of the working alliance, the counselor and client contributions to it, and the perspectives of others about it are discussed. This study reviews obstacles to building and sustaining the alliance, such as resistance in the form of fear of counseling, and confusion related to counseling goals, tasks, and bonds. Finally, mention is made of the possible research and policy implications of emphasizing the working alliance in career counseling practice.
The author provides a brief overview of A. Bandura's (1977, 1997) self-efficacy theory, followed by a discussion of the value of this theory to career counselors, which includes particularly useful features of the concept of self-efficacy and suggestions for its application in career assessment and counseling, with a special focus on group interventions.
Starting with a reflection on the September 11th, 2001, terrorist attacks oil the Pentagon and the World Trade Center and the corporate fraud and bankruptcies of 2002, the authors provide an overview of the professional literature concerning the origins, evolution, practice, and future implications of the work ethic in the United States. Discussion focuses on the American work ethic from both a historical and a modern-day perspective, highlighting the formation of what is now considered a major paradigm of work; views on the changing nature of the work ethic, especially for women and members of minority groups; and implications for career counselors.
The author investigated students' persistence regarding career aspirations in science and engineering (SE) professional careers as a function of race and sex. In a nationally representative sample of 8th graders, persistent racial minority and female students were compared with nonpersistent racial minority and male students regarding their self-concept, parental involvement, socioeconomic status, and academic achievement. Men were more likely than women to persist in SE career aspirations. Persistent students scored higher than did nonpersistent students on all of the variables studied. Academic proficiency and math self-efficacy were 2 of the strongest predictors of persistence in SE careers.
The number of young people who postpone their career decision is increasing in Japan, as is the high unemployment rate. In companies, on the other hand, the traditional seniority system and lifetime employment, which once provided job security for corporate employees, began to collapse. Employees' work ethics and corporate attitudes toward workers have also changed. Under such circumstances, career counseling is the focus of public attention. In this article written in 1999, the author examines some problems in Japan's career counseling, compared with career counseling in the U.S., and discusses which course Japan's career counseling should take to cope with dramatic social changes.
This thought-piece reaffirms and updates the 10 Imperatives for the 90s articulated in a 1993 issue of The Jossey-Bass New Directions for Student Services Series titled The Changing Role of Career Services (J. R. Rayman, 1993). In that volume (No. 62), 10 imperatives for the 90s specific to career services in colleges and universities were identified. Some of the issues that seemed critical then remain critical today. Others have been partially resolved and still others have taken on even more importance and urgency. This article reaffirms those 10 imperatives, provides additional support for their legitimacy, and offers speculations about the future.
This study evaluated the effects of DISCOVER (American College Testing [ACT], 1991), a computer-assisted career guidance system, on the career maturity of 38 students (22 girls and 16 boys) enrolled in a rural middle school. Students randomly assigned to the treatment group worked with DISCOVER for approximately 1 hour a day over a a-week period, whereas students in the control group did not have access to the DISCOVER program. Results indicated significant gains in career maturity among students in the treatment group (p < .05).
A revolution in the structures of work is taking place in most advanced industrialized countries. This article suggests that giving new meanings to the concept of ''career'' is one of the keys to economic success and social harmony in the new postindustrial society. It argues that a number of new social ligatures are needed to make the new concept of career accessible to all. One of these ligatures is lifelong access to career counseling. This article outlines a strategy developed in the United Kingdom for achieving such access and analyzes its cautious application of market and quasi-market principles to career counseling provision.
This article applies the social cognitive career theory formulated by Lent, Brown, and Hackett (1994) to training career counselors. Specifically, the authors propose extending the theory to understand and influence trainees' interest, engagement, and performance in career counseling. An initial offering of fin advanced career counseling seminar is described as an example of an intervention designed to increase interest and involvement in career counseling and to improve performance among career counselors. Suggestions are made for future research and for training students to be interested, involved, and skilled in providing career counseling.
In a study of 949 elementary students, mixed support was found for four theoretical positions concerning the role of childhood in career development. For Ginzberg's theory, support was found for his observation that interests play the major role in both the selection and rejection of careers throughout the period of childhood. For Roe's theory, the authors found evidence that family configuration influenced occupational choice/no choice. From Havighurst's theory, support was found for the idea that identification with a parent's work is particularly strong among younger children. A number of aspects of each of the theories failed to be confirmed.
One characteristic of professionals is that they reflect on the nature of their discipline; attention to the history of one's discipline is an important way of doing this. Efforts to trace the historical roots of vocational theory have been successful only as far back as late Renaissance Spain and southern Europe, notably in Chabassus and Zytowski's (1987) discussion of Sanchez de Arevalo's (1468) Speculum Vitae Humanae (Mirror of Human Life). We locate some recognizably modern concepts in a 10th-century Iraqi text, the Rasa'il Ikhwan al-Safa wa-Khillan al-Wafa, or Treatises of the Brothers of Purity (Ikhwan al-Safa, 955/1928).
The pyramidal shape of most organizations dictates that virtually all careers will level out before an employee reaches the top of the institution, agency, or corporation. How to maintain or enhance worker productivity and job satisfaction when an employee remains at a career level that discourages one's aspirations are concerns for career counselors, their clients, and organizational executives. This article defines career plateauing, explains types and sources of plateauing, and suggests counseling interventions that can help individuals to recognize and adjust to plateauing. In addition, we recommend proactive measures that will perpetuate the work motivation of effectively-performing plateaued workers as well as remediate the work behavior of the ineffective, plateaued worker. One of life's maxims is that all careers reach a level after which no higher achievement can be expected. From night watchguard to chief executive officer, each person's career has its apex. Thus, career plateauing is inevitable for all who strive and struggle in the work world (Bardwick, 1986). The point in time when an individual will experience, if not recognize, career plateauing is difficult to predict as is the extent to which that person can influence the timing or impact of this phenomenon.
This study examined how career certainty, grade level, and gender relate to short-term changes in work values (Human-Personal, Non-Work, Power-Control, Money-Security) among junior high and high school students (N = 496). With scores based on multivariate ANOVAs, the high and moderate career certainty groups scored significantly higher than the low certainty group on all work values except Non-Work at time 1 (similar results were found at time 2, 6 months later). Between time 1 and 2, each work value declined slightly but significantly; for both Human-Personal and Power-Control, however, the decline over time was greater for the high certainty group than for the low certainty group. The findings suggest that during adolescence, higher career certainty reflects greater engagement in a vocational identity search and a more active consideration of work values.
Increasing recognition of cultural influences on career development requires expanded theoretical and practical perspectives. Theories of career development need to explicate views of culture and provide direction for career counseling with clients who are culturally diverse. The Systems Theory Framework (STF) is a theoretical foundation that accounts for systems of influence on people's career development, including individual, social, and environmental/societal contexts. The discussion provides a rationale for systemic approaches in multicultural career counseling and introduces the central theoretical tenets of the STF. Through applications of the STF, career counselors are challenged to expand their roles and levels of intervention in multicultural career counseling.
Traveling the information highway in the process of career counseling or providing career counseling services via the Internet pose additional challenges for counselors. In this article, the authors use current ethical guidelines to guide discussion of, and possible resolutions to, challenges posed by incorporating the Internet into career counseling.
A university career development course based on cognitive information-processing theory was assessed. Students who took the course showed a significant decrease in their negative career thoughts when the Career Thoughts Inventory (J. P. Sampson, G. W. Peterson, J, G. Lenz, R. C. Reardon, & D. E. Saunders, 1996a) was used as a pretest and posttest measure. The greatest decrease in negative thinking was found in students with the highest level of negative thinking at the beginning of the course. The specific components of negative career thinking-decision-making confusion and commitment anxiety-contributed significantly to the main effect. There were no significant interactions with ethnicity or sex.
This article responds to D. A. Jepsen's (2000) commentary on Sampson et al.'s theory-based approach to using readiness assessment to improve career services (J. P,Sampson, G. W. Peterson, R C. Reardon, & J. G. Lent, 2000). Three topics are included in this response: the reliability, validity, and utility of readiness assessment measures; verbal ability and the use of cognitive information-processing theory in practice; and the potential contribution of reflective evaluation in career decision making. This article concludes with recommended research questions to examine the impact of readiness assessment on the effectiveness of career service delivery.
A conceptual framework suggests that employers will favor applicants from specific employment channels (job search techniques) depending on the qualifications sought. Logistic regression was used to analyze the responses of 1012 baccalaureate graduates to a survey I month after graduation. The results support the proposition that alternative search techniques have differential effects depending on the qualifications offered. All search techniques except I revealed interaction effects, favoring or limiting graduates with specific characteristics such as appropriate specialization and higher ability. Direct contact with employers and early initiation of search contributed directly to initial baccalaureate-level employment.
Researchers and practitioners embarked on a collaborative venture to develop, implement, and evaluate a career intervention program for 7th grade students who were at-risk for Vocational underachievement. Students participating in the Career Horizons Program demonstrated enhanced confidence in performing tasks related to investigating, selecting, and implementing a career choice. They also considered a greater number of careers and selected those that were congruent with their interests. No change was found in confidence regarding degree of self-knowledge. Suggestions are provided for improving on the development and evaluation of career exploration programs to enhance career self-efficacy and broaden the career horizons of students in at-risk environments.
This study evaluated the career maturity and career decision-making attributional style of high school students in an ethnically diverse, southeastern urban school system. Participants provided information about sex, age, current class standing, ethnic background, type of diploma sought, career goal, and grade point average and completed the Assessment of Attributions for Career Decision Making (Luzzo & Jenkins-Smith, 1998) and the revised Career Maturity Inventory (Crites & Savickas, 1995). Results indicated a significant, positive relationship between career maturity and an optimistic attributional style. Young men perceived more control over their career decision making than did young women. Suggestions for counselors are discussed.
This article presents two activities that may be used in career counseling classes to make learning about career development theories more interesting and enjoyable.
This study examines the influence of parental education and behaviors on adolescents' career exploration. The participants were 236 9th-grade students in German middle-track schools. The results indicated that parental authoritativeness, openness to adolescents' issues, and concern with promoting career exploration significantly related to the career exploration by their children, independent of parental educational background and adolescent gender.
This study compared levels of career maturity between college students with and without learning disabilities and investigated factors associated with career maturity. Few differences in career maturity were found. However, different predictors of career maturity for the two groups emerged. For students with learning disabilities, number of accommodations and quantity of work experience accounted for 22% of the variance in career maturity. For students without disabilities, academic achievement and type of work experience accounted for 21% of the variance in career maturity. Students with learning disabilities who received more instructional accommodations had lower levels of career maturity.
Which dimensions (time, opportunity, money, physical, mental, prestige) are most accurately judged across various occupations? Which occupations (e.g., secretary, nurse, truck driver) are most accurately judged across the various dimensions? Students in a rehabilitation program (n = 60) were reasonably accurate on all dimensions except opportunity. They had more accurate information on some occupations (e.g., nurse) than on others (e.g., mechanic). Functional cognition is discussed in terms of prior interest or real-world contact with these vocational dimensions and occupations.
This study explored the self-reported psychological adjustment for congruent, incongruent, and moderately congruent employed male ministers. Psychological adjustment was operationally defined by the scales of the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI). The concept of congruence was defined using the Strong Interest Inventory Minister Scale. The multivariate analysis of variance revealed a significant main effect of group membership on the MMPI scales. The univariate analysis showed significant findings on eight MMPI scales. In general, the results indicate that the three minister groups varied in psychological adjustment as assessed by the MMPI scales. Congruent ministers tend to be psychologically healthier than are the incongruent minister group.
A videotape playback procedure (self-confrontation) following a career-related conversation is proposed as a means of studying career development from an action perspective. This perspective is premised on an understanding of career development as intentional, goal-directed, and occurring in a social context. In this article, a career conversation between a parent and an adolescent is used to illustrate the procedure. During the individual playback, the participants are asked for their thoughts and feelings (cognitions) while the conversation took place, and their interpretation of it. The categories used in the analysis are described. This procedure provides contextually-sensitive and empirically-grounded data useful for researchers and practitioners.
Some recent perspectives on gender differences in life and career planning are discussed, focusing on the gendered context of women's and men's lives. Men and women tend to develop different orientations regarding occupational achievement and interpersonal relationships. These orientations interact with broader sociocultural norms for the sexes' behavior to produce different life-style opportunities and demands. Work environments also embody broadly accepted assumptions and expectations for men and women, affecting the choices and expectations they face in the work place.
These observations are often made about women's career outcomes: (a) women, as compared to men, do not experience career outcomes that are consistent with their training and abilities, and (b) interruptions in women's careers are linked to marriage and children. The current study examined whether these patterns applied to women in art who may have more flexible paid work schedules. Women (N = 109), who trained in art, were compared to their male classmates (N = 99) 18 years after art school. Career patterns, midlife occupations, marital status, and number of children were examined. No gender differences were noted in midlife occupations, however, women experienced significantly more career discontinuity than men, and women with discontinuous careers had significantly more children than women in continuous patterns.
This project sought to determine whether interest and ability measures can help high school students identify vocational education programs in which they may experience satisfaction and success. Interest measures (6) and ability measures (15) were administered to 2,101 seniors in 19 area vocational-technical schools. About 80% of the satisfied/successful seniors would have been referred, by a computer-based score interpretation, to the job cluster containing the vocational program they completed. Generally, score profiles were congruent with program content. Results indicate that computer-based interpretations can effectively and efficiently link interest and ability scores to vocational-technical program options.
The purpose of this investigation was to explore childhood career development by examining 4th- and Sth-grade students' career and self-awareness, exploration, and career planning. Responses to written assignments provided qualitative data for analysis. Written narrative data were analyzed using consensual qualitative research methods as described by C. E. Hill, B. J. Thompson, and E. N. Williams (1997). Consistent with theory (D. Super, 1990), children's reflections on prominent career tasks and influences revealed 8 of the 9 (all but curiosity) dimensions of childhood career development as outlined by Super. In addition, participants described their conceptions of work, a domain not explicitly articulated by Super and worthy of further inquiry.
In this response, the author highlights the contributions of E. P. Cook, M. J. Heppner, and K. M. O'Brien's (2002) ecological approach to women's career development and reviews the ways that the case studies in this special section illustrate that model. Although this model may enrich and improve career theories and counseling, the author urges caution in assuming that the emphases of an ecological model apply to all women. The concept of individual differences within, as well as between, the genders must remain paramount in career theory and counseling approaches. The author urges further attention to research and counseling interventions that help explicate the utility of the ecological model.
This article describes how career development programs became the focus of an international partnership between the United States and Canada. Beginning in 1976 in the United States, the National Occupational Information Coordinating Committee (NOICC) and its State Occupational Information Coordinating Committees (SOICCs) developed training and materials that promote the use of occupational and labor market information. Similarly, in the early 1970s, Canada began to explore the feasibility of creating a computer-based career information delivery system. what follows is the story of an unusual and significant international collaboration. It concludes with identification of lessons learned.
Career development services are often poorly interlinked. They overlap, yet they can also be too far apart. They reach out, yet they do not always reach out to those who need the services the most. With examples from Denmark, this article indicates how and why career development services are linked in partnerships at different levels. Is a wall-to-wall carpet of career development services to be preferred over a patchwork quilt?.
Although extant career theories provide important conceptual insights into the content and process of the school-to-work transition, they have not addressed 2 questions that need to be considered in future theoretical and research agendas. These questions, which are addressed in this article, are (a) why are career theories not developed to account for the school-to-work process? and (b) are the career theories proposed here complete in their explanation of the school-to-work process?.
Responding to national and local initiatives, the career development profession has been engaged in efforts to aid understanding and facilitation of the school-to-work (STW) transition process. Vocational theory has been cited as one especially important area in which the career development field can contribute to the STW movement, yet career development theories do not typically highlight their relevance to the STW transition process. This special issue of The Career Development Quarterly features a set of articles that examine how several prominent career development theories (person-environment fit, social learning, developmental, and social cognitive) can be brought to bear on the STW process. Three discussants assess the theories' utility as templates for studying and facilitating the transition from school to work.
On the occasion of the 70th anniversary of the Strong Interest Inventory (1927-1997), this article reviews the history of this landmark inventory and the legacy of E. K. Strong, Jc; specifically, his development of the inventorying method and use of criterion-related scale development. The recent trend of content-related scale development is also reviewed. Recent innovations in the Strong and future directions for predicting career behavior are discussed. Overall, the early empirical work conducted by Strong created a sound foundation for predicting vocational behavior and for later innovations in career assessment.
This article reviews the literature in the areas of theoretical contributions to career development, vocational assessment, individual differences, and career counseling written in 1994. It also reviews relevant career books that appeared on the scene. Areas covered in the review as noted above for the most part are consistent with other reviews and represent the contemporary research thrusts in the held.
This study identified predictors that discriminated between nontraditional and traditional career aspirations in a sample composed of 930 eighth-grade female students (52 Asian Americans, 123 Hispancis, 61 African Americans, 669 Whites, and 15 Native Americans). Results indicated that the students who aspired to careers in science or engineering scored significantly higher on educational aspirations; perceived parental expectations; student-reported grade point averages (GPAs); and mathematics, reading, and science test scores than did girls who aspired to homemaking occupations. They also scored higher on measures of self-esteem, internal locus of control, socioeconomic status, and had fewer siblings. Educational aspirations, parental expectations, self-reported GPA, and science proficiency were the most discriminators between the groups. Results also indicated that differences in the distributions of career aspirations across racial-ethnic groups were significant.
This study examined the relation between 3 aspects of congruence (vocational, leisure, and skill utilization) and 6 well-being (or strain) measures (occupational satisfaction, work satisfaction, anxiety, burnout, somatic complaints and self-esteem). The study was conducted among 120 participants (lawyers, psychologists, and physicians). Findings were that (a) correlations among the congruence aspects ranged between .24 and .36, (b) all correlations between each of the congruence aspects and each of the well-being measures were in the expected direction, and (c) all 3 congruence aspects showed an additive effect on all well-being measures. Thus, supportive evidence for the benefits of congruence in its broader meaning was found.
This article contains suggestions for counselors and parents regarding the active role parents can play in the career development of their children. These suggestions are based on the author's research on the intentional, goal-directed action of parents in influencing the career development of their children. In the context of an increasingly important role for parents and families in the development of adolescent children, three dimensions of the active role of parents are discussed: the intentionality and meaning attributed to career influence by parents and adolescents, the use of narrative, and sources of conflict.
The author reviews the literature related to life roles and describes a variety of techniques that can be used from a constructivist career counseling perspective. Seven counseling techniques are included: life space map, life line, life-space genogram, life roles circles, life roles assessment, life role analysis, and goal map. Framed from the storied approach (P. E. Brott, 2001), constructivist applications to co-construct, de-construct, and construct the client's life story are presented. Applications for use with diverse populations are suggested.
This Study examined the relation of self-efficacy to length and type of training in a sample of Italian career Counselors. Findings indicated that amount of career counseling training was positively related to counselors' self-efficacy regarding their abilities to conceptualize vocational problems, deal with career indecision concerns, and provide educational counseling. In addition, counselors who had participated in an in-service training course that focused on social cognitive/learning theories reported stronger self-efficacy regarding their skills at vocational problem conceptualization and at educational counseling than did those who received more eclectic training.
The authors maintain that the social learning theory of career development and counseling has not been applied to diverse populations. To address this gap in the literature, the authors conducted a qualitative analysis of interviews with 21 middle school students in a low-income, culturally diverse, inner-city public school. Four themes emerged, reflecting the influence of discrimination on participants' career learning: contextual barriers and resources for learning, and psychological barriers and resources for learning. The authors provide a conceptual framework for assessing resources and barriers and a rationale for why these aspects often remain hidden or unexamined in career assessment with clients who are vulnerable to discrimination.
Changes in welfare policy require recipients to find employment and created a need for effective career counseling strategies. Welfare recipients face both environmental and personal barriers that affect employability and career development. Issues such as the employment market, the availability of needed community resources, and the stress of being a single parent need to be understood before appropriate career counseling can occur. In this article, the author discusses possible barriers to career counseling and suggests effective career counseling methods for individuals who receive public assistance payments.
The purpose of this study was to examine barriers to and facilitators of career goals among college students in the framework of the Social Cognitive Career Theory (R. W. Lent, S. D. Brown, & G. Hackett, 1994). Questionnaires were completed by 2,743 college freshmen. Chi-square tests and MANOVA were used to analyze the data. The authors found gender and ethnic differences in perceptions of barriers to career goals. Differences were found by ethnicity, but not by gender, in perceptions of facilitators of career goals. The authors examined factors influencing career choice goals and specific barriers and facilitators. They discuss implications for career counselors.
This response (a) makes a few comments about the articles as a group, (b) briefly highlights the historical context of previous theory-based models for career guidance in schools, and (c) argues that school to work (STW) is not an intellectual but an economic and a political strategy that needs to be examined carefully, especially in relation to students' career needs and theory-based interventions of the recent past.
This article reviews and analyzes the different perspectives on career transitions discussed in the September 1995 issue of The Career Development Quarterly. The articles in this issue share common threads in their perspectives on career stages, the relation of cognitive factors and career challenges, and the impact of gender differences on career transitions. This article also discusses career transitions during relocation and factors, such as being part of a dual career couple, that may buffer the financial burden of career transitions.
In this study, the authors used case notes to classify client concerns that surfaced during career counseling with adults in a university-sponsored community counselling center. A two-stage classification system was developed and used to estimate the frequencies of occurrence for career and personal issues that surface during career counseling. The authors concluded that a substantial overlap exists between the content of career counseling and that of psychotherapy.
This article discusses the rationale for and process of creating and developing an occupational information brochure targeted for ethnic minority students. Minorities need to expand their awareness and knowledge of career options, and few specifically targeted resources now exist. Field testing during the development process showed that a printed brochure answering questions on how to pursue a specific occupation that contains brief biographies of ethnic minority role models, can both inform and inspire. Such a resource can help equalize minority access to career opportunities.
Donald Edwin Super was a member of the National Career Development Association from 1934 to 1994, a full 60 years. Starting at midcentury, his writings and lectures provided the main impetus to expand vocational guidance to encompass career counseling. This article, structured around the five stages in Super's life stage model and narrated in the language of vocational development tasks that he identified and researched, tells the story of Super's own career development and extrapolates the major themes in his unparalleled career as a vocational psychologist and career counselor.
A review of The Career Development Quarterly was conducted for a 20-year period (Volumes 23 through 42). A total of 791 articles were classified into the 14 substantive areas of career research and practice devised by Fitzgerald and Rounds (1989). Author institutional affiliation, geographic location, and leading contributors were also computed. Two principle areas of research activity and publication were evident (life-span perspectives on career development, and career development interventions), which accounted for 51.2% of the articles examined. Overall, Quarterly content has remained stable and no clearly definable trends across the years were apparent in any given topic.
The National Career Development Association celebrated its 90th birthday at its recent summer conference. During that span of time, there has been significant development of theory, tools, and interventions as well as standards for the preparation of the members of the career development profession. The author reviews those accomplishments and suggests some needed directions for the immediate future.
Career counseling has a long and illustrious past, dating back to the contributions of Frank Parsons and including notable theories and Substantial research related to career development. In the practice of career counseling, however, there is not substantial evidence about what works with which clients under what conditions. In the next 10 years, there will be opportunities to provide career assistance through novel means to reach more individuals, however, some of these opportunities, such as the Internet, can also have adverse effects if not used appropriately. The author also discusses a vision that involves a resurgence of theory, research, and practice related to career Counseling.
The author explores the possibility of theory integration in career development and counseling, focusing primarily on bridging the gap between objectivist/positivistic and constructivist approaches. The potentiality of combining concepts from varied theories into a preliminary framework is discussed. This framework proposes 3 possibilities: career as self-realization, growing experiences, and context conceptualization. Because its focus is career development practice, this framework triggers some heuristic thoughts that might be seen by career counselors as applicable to their counseling interventions.
Although all women's career development has been largely ignored, gifted women, in particular, have been virtually invisible within the career field. Many people assume that choosing a career should be easy for women with high intelligence and multiple gifts; however, the challenges to occupational choice for gifted women are frequently amplified because they are expected to use their talents while conforming to societal expectations of them as women. In this article, the authors seek to enhance awareness of some of these issues by first discussing one gifted woman's difficulties and then addressing treatment issues, using an ecological perspective.
Two conceptual models are proposed in this article-one for work discrimination and the other for discrimination coping strategies pertaining to lesbian, gay, and bisexual workers, The work discrimination model includes 3 dimensions (formal vs. informal, potential vs. encountered, and perceived vs. real). The coping strategies model outlines methods that deal with potential and encountered discriminations. It includes vocational choice and work adjustment strategies; the latter are further categorized under identity management or discrimination management strategies.
Twelve studies published between 1983 and 1996 that met the definitions for admissible studies established by Baker and Popowicz (1983) for a mete-analytic review of the effects of career education interventions were submitted to a similar meta-analytic integration. Effect sizes based on Glass's (1976) formula were determined for the current sample and were combined with the Baker and Popowicz (1983) sample, providing a sample of 30 studies and an overall effect size of 0.39.
This study explored how persons become self-employed. In critical incident interviews (Flanagan, 1954) with 5 self-employed persons, the critical events that assisted or hindered progress toward self-employment were elicited in chronological order. First, the 108 incidents were organized into 22 categories. Next, using the chronological order of categories of events, 2 basic patterns or plots for becoming self-employed were identified. Last, 8 distinctive themes of personal progress in the patterns were described. In general, becoming self-employed involved establishing conditions of action that enhanced a sense of agency, enabling each person to make a decision.
This article provides counselors with concept-based materials that clients can use to understand and structure the career problem-solving and decision-making process. Clients can use this knowledge to solve immediate career problems, transfer the knowledge to future career problems, or generalize the knowledge to other types of personal, social, and family problems.
The authors used data for 2,722 British adolescents, ages 14-18 years, to explore whether work-related skills and career role models are associated with career maturity when sociodemographic characteristics (age, socioeconomic status, gender, family structure), family support (mother involvement, father involvement), and personal characteristics (self-confidence, academic motivation) are controlled, Having work-related skills and having a career role model were positively associated with career maturity, and having career pressure was negatively associated with career maturity. Family structure and socioeconomic status were unrelated to career maturity. Academic motivation, mother involvement, father involvement, and self-confidence were related to career maturity at the bivariate but not at the multivariate level.
The author discusses the storied approach as a constructivist perspective on career counseling. The storied approach explores the client's world through story development as the client and counselor collaboratively co-construct, deconstruct, and construct life stories. Story development encompasses the client's past, present, and future life experiences that are related to life roles (i.e., family, student, worker, leisure, community). Assessment consists of both quantitative and qualitative data that are woven into the client's story as the symbols or meanings that call for further exploration.
J.P. Sampson, G. W. Peterson, R. C. Reardon, and J. G. Lent (2000) present in clear, concise terms a short tour of the cognitive information-processing (CIP) framework that is useful for stimulating practitioners to improve career services. These authors strike an appropriate tone of optimism and caution that matches the article author's own experience as a practitioner and a teacher of the CIP framework. The author's optimism is fueled by fresh insights suggested by the CIP framework and an eagerness to try them out. He expresses caution regarding the need for affirming evidence.
Eleventh graders participated in a longitudinal study of career decision making in which they completed a series of career-related inventories and followup interviews. There was little change in work-related values between the 2 administrations of the Values Scale (G.W. Fitzsimmons, D. Macnab, & C. Casserly, 1985); however, greater variation occurred on the Salience Inventory (G. W. Fitzsimmons et al., 1985), particularly Role Value Implementation. Role salience seems less stable than values, perhaps reflecting the transition from high school to postsecondary education or the world of work. Implications for D. E. Super's (1981, 1990, 1994, 1995) theory of career development and applications to career counseling are outlined.
College students with and without disabilities (N = 121) completed measures of career decision-making self-efficacy (N. E. Betz, K. Klein, & K. M. Taylor, 1996) and career decision-making attributional style (D. A, Luzzo & A. Jenkins-Smith, 1998). Students with disabilities reported significantly lower levels of career decision-making self-efficacy and exhibited more of a pessimistic attributional style for career decision making than did their peers without disabilities. Results are discussed in the context of developing effective career counseling interventions for college students with disabilities.
This article discusses the major contributions (Krumboltz & Worthington, 1999; Lent, Hackett, & Brown, 1999; Savickas, 1999; Swanson & Fouad, 1999) to this special issue of The Career Development Quarterly on the application of career development theories to the school-to-work transition. Common thematic elements in these 4 articles include a focus on the individual who faces the transition from high school to work and an emphasis on the developmental aspects of the transition. The article concludes with a cautionary recommendation that theory-building efforts derived from the individual experiences of work-bound youth ought to be included in theoretical and intervention initiatives to facilitate the school-to-work transition.
Because of the high chronicity of work-related problems in a Veterans Administration Medical Center population, many of the traditional methods of career assessment, counseling, and placement have proven ineffectual. In this article the authors detail the development of an intervention based on narrative or storytelling principles. They describe efforts to introduce this model to patients as well as to relate patients' stories to vocational outcomes. The usefulness of stories as an organizing principle for counselors and clients is discussed, and suggestions are offered for further uses of storytelling interventions.
This study investigated demographic and attitudinal differences across managers classified as nonplateaued, content plateaued, hierarchically plateaued, or both content and hierarchically plateaued. The results revealed significant demographic differences across the 4 groups on a variety of variables. Managers who were classified as both hierarchically and job content plateaued tended to report less favorable job attitudes than managers who were plateaued for one reason only or managers who were nonplateaued. Managers who were only job content plateaued tended to report less favorable job attitudes than managers who were only hierarchically plateaued.
Using Derald Sue's framework for examining the counseling process with racial-ethnic minority clients, the author develops a new model to examine the career counseling process with Asian Americans in terms of culturally appropriate and inappropriate process and outcomes. Recommendations for culturally appropriate career counseling interventions are also offered from this integrated framework.
This article is a call for a greater focusing of theory building and counseling process invention for the career development programs of schools and social institutions.
This article describes an innovative project designed to more effectively meet the career development needs of inner-city Black youth. The model for this project includes a multi-service approach that integrates many traditional vocational development services and community counseling strategies within a culturally sensitive program.
A 2-week summer program for adolescent girls featuring awareness of nontraditional career choices was provided via a cooperative plan from a public school system, a community college, and a university. The program included 80 hours of activities: business and industry visitations, technical and trade shop hands-on activities as well as self-concept building experiences. Upon completion, a majority of the participants reported confidence in learning about and choosing an occupation, and clearer ideas about possible occupations for themselves. Implications of these results for career development practices and research are described.
The 1st article (C. Campbell & M. Ungar, 2004) of this 2-part exploration of postmodern approaches to family therapy and narrative approaches to career counseling explored the differences between traditional trait and factor counseling models and postmodern approaches using life narratives and social constructionism. In this 2nd article, the authors discuss 7 aspects of their practice as postmodern career counselors that ask clients to (a) know what you want, (b) know what you have, (c) know what you hear, (d) know what constrains you, (e) map your preferred story, (f) grow into your story, and (g) grow out of your story. Several case studies demonstrate the applicability of these theories to practice.
Since the early 20th century, career counseling has been the object of public policy and legislation. As such, the important contributions of career counseling to labor market processes have reinforced the role of career counseling and related career interventions as sociopolitical instruments vital to the facilitation of national goals. The author discusses the interactions of career counseling and public policy; the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats related to such interactions; and selected strategic issues facing professional career counselors in the 21st century.
Using K. Lewin's (1938) concept of a force field analysis, a model is proposed for examining the challenges of providing career counseling in Asia in terms of prevailing and countervailing forces. The model also suggests a need to avoid a simple importation of Western models of career counseling, which may not be an optimal fit for the Asian cultural context. Instead, the cultural accommodation approach is offered as a viable alternative.
The article describes and examines the recent development of career development and counseling in Hong Kong in 3 major settings: school, university, and community. Convergence and divergence in career counseling between Hong Kong and the United States are discussed, in reference to a number of areas, including the freedom to choose and compromise, collectivism and individualism, school-to-work transition, use of tests, and types of career intervention. Areas of collaboration between the 2 regions are identified and discussed.
There is considerable diversity in the literature regarding age and gender differences on career maturity and career decision status. There is also a dearth of data on high school samples. The present study reports cross-sectional data from 1,971 Australian adolescents, ages 12.51-17.99 years, who completed the Career Decision Scale (S. H. Osipow, C. G. Carney, J. Winer, B.Yanico, & M. Koschier, 1976) and the Carter Development inventory (Australian; 1. Lokan, 1984). Results illustrated a developmental progression in career maturity, although a less uniform pattern emerged with gender differences. Findings regarding career indecision also presented a complex picture and highlight the need to focus on other demographic and contextual factors.
A cohort of 172 high school leavers were followed over a a-year period to determine factors that affect well-being throughout transition. High school leavers are those individuals who are graduating from high school and are progressing to further schooling, to work, or are unemployed. Employment and school continuation were unrelated to self-esteem and depression. Factors that influenced the transition process included money and activity problems, internality, stability, and controllability both of attributions about general transition difficulties at specific time periods and of external attributions about unemployment. The need for new approaches to career theory and practice is discussed.
The rapid changes that are occurring in the national and global context in which people forge their personal careers dictate changes in the profession of career counseling. These changes are to 2 specific types. The first involves the reexamination and adjustment of the theory, assumptions, and practice that undergird professional career counseling to include more fully the impact of external forces on individual career development. The second needed thrust is the proactive development of public policy, legislation, and funding designed to provide high-quality career planning services to the nation's citizens across the life span.
This study examined the effectiveness of a structured cognitive stress reduction program for unemployed managers involved in an outplacement program. Participants were randomly assigned to one of two conditions. One group of managers received structured weekly counseling using a cognitively based stress reduction program. They were compared with a control group that received unstructured advice about managing stress as part of a typical outplacement program. The managers who received the cognitive intervention, as compared with managers in the control group, found reemployment significantly sooner and showed reductions in levels of state anxiety and anger that were statistically significant.
A within-counselor design was used in which the authors analyzed audio recordings of career counseling interviews with clients who had relatively positive and relatively negative expectations about counseling. Both of the clients who had relatively positive expectations about counseling were rated significantly higher on a global measure of level of involvement.
This article examined the degree to which personality hardiness (control, commitment, and challenge), career beliefs (status, preference, motivation, and flexibility), self-efficacy (general and social), and occupational choice status related to career self-efficacy among a sample of 181 college juniors and seniors. Results from an intercorrelation matrix and regression analysis indicated that motivation, self-efficacy, occupational choice status, and commitment correlated significantly to career self-efficacy. Applications of these findings to career counseling are discussed.
This study investigated the factors that relate to the career salience of Nigerian dual-career women. Findings showed that neither family size nor level of education related to the women's career salience. The husbands' level of education did relate to the women's career salience. Positive self-image and higher family income were identified as the advantages, while nonegalitarianism was emphasized as the major drawback of the dual-career relationship.
This study explored how students choose careers, their attitudes toward vocational education, and whether or not they would consider enrolling in a nontraditional vocational education program.
Because of changes in legislation regarding the U.S. welfare system, there is an urgency now that has never before existed, except perhaps during the Great Depression, for career counselors to advocate for those of their clients who are on welfare and for their minor dependents. E. B. Lent (2001) has revitalized the debate over the role Rogers's person-centered perspective should play in career development with welfare-to-work (WTW) clients. The usefulness of such an approach with today's clients was explored within the context of inherent limitations of Rogers's person-centered perspective. Potential ethical conflicts for career counselors working with WTW clients were identified.
The authors describe the experiences of university students who completed the Intelligent Careers Card Sort((R)) (ICCS), a career exploration exercise that is based on the Intelligent Career framework. The Intelligent Career suggests that there are 3 ways of knowing, which individuals should consider to successfully navigate the workplace: knowing-why, knowing-bow, and knowing-whom. This model is discussed in the context of the subjective career and the changing economy, and research on card sorts is briefly reviewed. In general, students thought that the ICCS was a useful part of the career development groups in which it was administered.
In this article, the authors present a case example of a Chinese American lesbian woman who seeks counseling for career decision making. The client's career issues stem from cultural issues that have created a dichotomy in her life. Using an ecological model, the authors dissect the case, propose interventions, and identify, potential problems that may arise.
The use of the term career development as descriptive of both the factors and the processes influencing individual career behavior and as synonymous with intervention in career behavior (e.g., the practice of career development) is relatively recent. As professional vocabulary evolves across time, so do the form and substance of career interventions and those to whom they are directed. At the beginning of the new millennium, this article reviews the legacy of the 20th century and considers selected theoretical and practical issues likely to be prominent in the practice of career development in the decades immediately ahead.
This article briefly chronicles selected major events and personalities that have stimulated and shaped career development practices in the 20th century. in its headings by decades, the article seeks to contextualize major political, social, economic, and scientific themes that have influenced the evolution of models of career behavior, career interventions, and the preparation of counselors to engage in the practice of career development.
The author of this article presents the Career Path Tournament, a game for heightening participants' awareness of sociological factors (e.g., race, gender, and discrimination in hiring) influencing career advancement and of the need to anticipate and cope with these factors. The game, which is based on Rosenbaum's (1976, 1981, 1984) Tournament Model, is intended for junior high, high school, and college students in a classroom setting. Undergraduate participants' (N = 74) quantitative and qualitative evaluations of the game are presented as evidence that the game raised awareness of sociological barriers and provided participants with helpful suggestions for adaptively coping with these barriers.
Recent career studies have highlighted the role of parents as active agents in the career development of their children. This article illustrates a career exploration approach for youth that involves parents as direct observers in the career counselling process. Included is a description of the Parent Involved Career Exploration (PICE) counseling method as well as some comments based on an initial case study evaluation.
The major elements of Super's life-span, life-space approach, their origins, and their evolution are briefly described. Five categories of possible future refinements in Super's approach are suggested.
Twentieth-century vocational guidance has been an objective enterprise in which counselors have studied and treated career indecision by abstracting and objectifying it. This article describes how the logical positivist perspective on indecision as an objective phenomenon has evolved over the course of this century. Then, the article explains how constructivist counselors view indecision as clients' subjective attempts to give meaning to crisis points in their lives. This view permits a conceptualization of career counseling as a process of articulating a client's life theme. The article concludes with a case study that illustrates a life-theme approach to counseling for career indecision.
This article reviews literature published in 1993 that is of interest and use to career counselors. Topical areas include definitions of career counseling, descriptions of and outcome research on career assessment and intervention methods, career counseling issues and techniques of particular relevance to women and members of various special groups, and counseling with persons making career transitions.
One of Super's most important contributions has been in explicating those developmental tasks that involve planning, exploring, and deciding, processes known collectively as readiness for career choices. The authors review existing means of conceptualizing and operationalizing the various aspects of readiness, as well as innovative practice applications that have emerged from this work. Next, selected elaborations and extensions of the readiness construct are described. Finally, future directions for theory and research on readiness are presented with a particular emphasis on the promise of considering contextual issues, motivational factors, and an expanded measurement perspective in subsequent inquiry and practice.
Often university students are faced with career decisions and seek help from the university counseling center. The pyramid model is a useful tool to assist the counselor and the student in the decision-making process. The metaphor enables the student to understand the tasks that lie ahead in the career counseling process. It is holistic. A case study is included to illustrate the three-dimensional model of career counseling of university students.
Occupational problems have negative consequences across life domains, yet relatively little research addresses the psychological resources necessary for the adult career transition. Considering Super's concept of career adaptability (D. E. Super & E. G. Knasel, 198 1), the authors outline what they believe adults need to successfully manage the transition. Individuals in transition were interviewed and their responses were analyzed using qualitative methods. Participants who anticipated career change planfully and realistically, even when their jobs appeared to be secure, cited better experiences of the transition and perceived themselves to be coping better than did participants who ignored signs of change or reacted unrealistically soon after the job loss.
Career theory and practice have long emphasized person variables (e.g., abilities, needs, interests) and have only recently begun focusing on environmental variables in addressing cultural context issues. Contemporary emphasis on contextual variables reflects notable movement toward attaining cultural relevance in career theory and practice. Role salience and values, which are central to developmental perspectives on career and have been considered in other approaches, are key contextual variables that can be examined to make additional progress toward this goal. The author argues that examining the cultural dimensions of social roles and values can enrich theory and enhance practice regarding life-career development.
This article documents the development of career counseling in Malaysia from 1957-when the British colonizers departed-to 2000. Although counseling, psychology, and psychiatry had their roots in mental health and medical environments, career counseling had its origins in the system of schooling and has now spread widely to business and industry. This article presents information on the historic and economic context of the development of career counseling, an exploration of the educational system from which career counseling was born, the cultural elements that have formed career counseling in the Malaysian context, and the application of M. Pope's (1995, 2000) stage development model to the development of career counseling in the Malaysian context.
The authors present data for a subsample of the National Education Longitudinal Study of 1988 (NELS:88; 1996). All participants in the study had attended a postsecondary institution within 2 years of graduation from high school and had selected a field of study. Educational choices were categorized by predominant Holland types (e.g., Realistic, Social, Conventional). There was a 3-way Gender x SES x Race-Ethnicity interaction. Race-ethnicity effects were strongest for men at lower SES levels and weakest for women at high SES levels. The nature of gender and SES effects differed across racial-ethnic groups.
In this article the authors discuss the application of Holland's theory (Holland, 1997) and cognitive information processing theory (CIP; Peterson, Sampson, & Reardon, 1991) to the case of a college student named Mandy who was deciding about a major and a future career. The authors also describe how a career planning class, the Self-Directed Search (SDS; Holland, Powell & Fritzsch, 1994), the Career Thoughts Inventory (CTI; Sampson, Peterson, Lent, Reardon, & Saunders, 1998), and Improving Your Career Thoughts: A Workbook for the Career Thoughts Inventory (Sampson, Peterson, Lent, Rearson, & Saunders, 1996) were used as interventions to allow Mandy to become aware of her negative thinking patterns and to begin the process of reframing these thoughts. The outcome of Mandy's case, her personal reactions to this article, and practical implications for other service providers, are discussed.
This article reviews the literature on vocational interests. Ten themes about vocational interests are discussed: development, correlates, measurement, homogeneity and differentiation, career choice, sex differences, stability, structure, career counseling, and cultural influences. These 10 themes are similar to major issues discussed by Strong(1943) in his landmark book on interests Vocational Interests of Men and Women. Directions for future research are presented.
Medcamp, a 3-day problem-based career intervention for students entering the 9th grade, implemented each of the 4 antecedents for self-efficacy. Ten boys and 35 girls participated in Medcamp; of these, 35 completed and returned the Medical Career Self-Efficacy Scales (developed by the authors for their study) both at the beginning and at the end of the program. Three scales measured specific self-efficacy (tasks students had performed during Medcamp), related self-efficacy (other tasks students would complete by the second year of medical school), and general self-efficacy (included lifestyle variables and study habits). Results demonstrated significant increases in self-efficacy on all 3 scales.
Four diagnostic signs derived from Holland's (1985a) theory of vocational personalities and occupational environments were evaluated for their ability to predict personality-environment congruence in a sample of 87 employed persons with special needs. Participants, 40% of whom were female, had an average age of 35.6 years. The diagnostic signs were employment congruence, aspirational congruence, employment coherence, and aspirational coherence, all measured during an initial assessment. The outcome was personality-environment congruence in a job held 15 months after the initial assessment. Employment congruence was found to be the best predictor of future personality-environment congruence. Employment coherence was also predictive of future personality-environment congruence, and aspirational congruence was correlated with the latter. The clinical and research implications of the findings were discussed.
Analysis of career paths of middle managers in savings banks revealed significant gender differences. This study of matched pairs found that men advanced faster and reached middle management through fewer promotions and positions than did their female counterparts. Men also had significantly more work experience outside of banking. In their banking careers, men held more jobs in lending, whereas women occupied more customer service positions.
The Internet is increasingly important for career counseling; however, there are few suggestions for training graduate counseling students how to use this technology. This project sought to address that lack by having graduate counseling students use a structured interview with undergraduate volunteer clients to assess which needs could be met using the Internet. Graduate students then identified relevant Web sites and explored these in a meeting with the volunteer clients. Results of class surveys indicated that participants encountered few obstacles using the Internet and perceived this intervention to be useful. Implications for training graduate students in using the Internet for career counseling are discussed.
Community career partnerships can draw into working alignment the critical aspects of career development for students (K-16) and the key social contexts that either promote or inhibit growth. The authors, using a qualitative research methodology, describe challenges faced by practitioners when attempting to create and implement a community career partnership. Implications for practice, theory, and public policies are discussed.
This article analyzes the implications of sociopolitical context for career services delivery. Beginning with a reflection on the social foundations of the practice of career counseling, 4 specific Portuguese conditions are presented and discussed in light of existing knowledge in the field. The 4 underlying issues presented are (a) the impact of political changes on career services delivery, (b) the rigidity vs. flexibility of the educational system, (c) political and psychological perspectives on employment, and (d) the relationship between power and career services delivery. A research agenda founded in political anthropology is proposed that may enhance future career services delivery.
The author acknowledges the significance of the 6 steps presented by hi. rope (2000) in his article A Brief History of Career Counseling in the United States. It is proposed that the historical stages for each kind of career counselor are most appropriately organized around federal legislation that affects it. Alternative stages, which the author believes are appropriate in tracing the history of the school counselor movement, are presented as an example of this approach.
The authors look back more than 30 years to those who introduced the use of the computer as an important new tool to assist students in the area of career development. To what extent have dreams been realized and concerns allayed? Rapid advances in technology, not included in the authors' vision, have transformed the world into a different place. How have these advances affected the use of computers in counseling, The article concludes with a list of current concerns, along with recommendations for further action and research.
This article examines the role of parent-adolescent attachment relationships in the-career exploration process. We propose that college students who report secure attachment relationships with their parents would engage in greater environmental and self-exploration, as well as greater nontraditionality of exploration, as measured by the degree of gender traditionality of their primary occupational preference. One hundred and thirty-seven undergraduates (50 men, 87 women) completed measures of parent attachment, career exploration, and a demographic form. The results of a canonical correlation analysis indicated that attachment to parents associated positively with environmental exploration. However, the results indicated that parental attachment was not associated with traditionality of exploration. An examination of relevant demographic variables suggested that age played a significant role, whereas gender did not. The article concludes with a discussion of the implications of these findings for career theory and practice.
This study examined whether 60 college students (41 women and 19 men), grouped according to their career locus of control, were differentially affected by a videotaped career intervention. The intervention was an attributional retraining procedure designed to persuade students to attribute low levels of confidence in making career decisions and career-related failures to a lack of effort. Results indicated that the career decision-making self-efficacy (CDMSE) of students who initially exhibited an external career locus of control significantly increased after the attributional retraining procedure (p < .05), whereas the students who initially exhibited an internal career locus of control demonstrated no significant increase in CDMSE after attributional retraining.
This study examined the readiness of male intercollegiate varsity athletes to make career-related decisions. The research questions compared students participating in revenue- and nonrevenue-producing sports as well as Caucasian and minority (Black, Asian American, Hispanic American, Native American, and other) student-athletes on eight dimensions of career maturity measured by the Career Development Inventory (Super, Thompson, Lindeman, Jordaan, & Myers, 1981). No significant differences were found in the overall career maturity of the student-athletes based either on the type of sport played or on their race. Also, the interaction of type of sport and race was not significant in determining differences in student-athletes' career maturity levels. Implications for career counseling programs for student-athletes and future research are discussed.
This article reviews the status of Super's emphasis on career development as a process of self-concept implementation. Beginning with an overview of research and measurement issues, the article proceeds to a discussion of contemporary research programs, including those on career self-efficacy and Gottfredson's theory of circumscription and compromise, relating specific aspects of the self-concept to career development. Recommendations for future theoretical developments, research, and career counseling are made.
With adolescents, the appreciation of career literature was predicted to relate to their reading skill and cognitive development as well as their need for career information. Forty 11th-grade and forty 12th-grade students at a university school read two passages from each of three domains of career literature: short stories, formal literature, and popular literature. The results indicated that both reading skill and cognitive development were related to the extent to which adolescents appreciated three passages in which career information was presented in the form of short stories and personal accounts. Reported need for information to make career choices did not relate to the appreciation of any of the six passages. Implications for theory and practice in the use of career literature are discussed.
The dramatic changes that have occurred in the former Soviet Union as part of its transformation from a communist command economy to a free-market economy are having a profound impact on the lives of its people. These changes are particularly important in the area of work and careers because these contrasting economic systems assign different meanings and valuations to these domains. Although the institutional and structural changes that are needed to make this transformation successful have been addressed extensively, the changes that are required in the career attitudes, values, and overall conduct of individuals have received little attention. This article applies a developmental-contextual approach to the analysis of changes that have occurred in the former Soviet Union and how they may affect individual career development.
Role demands weigh differently on men and women and the balance of role demands shifts when adult family members sustain injuries that compromise their physical capacity. Clients with orthopaedic and soft tissue injuries (N = 53) who were settling insurance claims or currently in litigation were assessed using the Life Roles Inventory (Values and Salience Scales), a Life Satisfaction Questionnaire (structured interview), and measurements of physical capacity, perceived exertion, and functional ability. Findings from this exploratory study suggest that although commitment to the major life roles does not change following injury, levels of participation and role value for working and home/family roles do change. The disruption of social networks is likely related to the working role for women in professional and skilled occupations. Financial concerns, strain in personal relationships, level of independence in self care, and pain on activity significantly affect performance and satisfaction.
The need for appropriate, timely, and increasingly comprehensive career development and education programs continues to escalate. It is interesting that despite the differences in cultures, religions, economies, political systems, and education structures, many countries face similar challenges when designing and implementing career development programs. Sharing and adapting career development interventions and techniques cross- culturally appear to be viable strategies for implementing or enhancing programs, provided the concepts and materials are tailored to the countries' unique requirements.
Fifteen individuals who received outplacement counseling (OPC) were interviewed to determine which services were helpful or hindering and whether there were services they would like to have received but did not. The critical incident technique (J. Flanagan, 1954) was used to analyze the data around 16 emergent categories. Results support previous research on client satisfaction with OPC and extend the knowledge by providing insight into 6 new categories of services individual clients would find helpful.
This article is a response to the case study presented by A C. Rehfuss (2003) regarding a client, Sue, who is experiencing discord in her career as a mediator. A conceptualization of the client and additional areas for client exploration are presented. Five steps of a constructivist career counseling approach are applied to the case to assist Sue with experiencing optimal functioning in her career through her proactive commitment to her life theme of mediation.
Assessment has been integral to career counseling since the early 1900s. During that time, the greatest amount of attention was focused on quantitative assessment. Thus, there is still very little to guide the development and conduct of qualitative assessment in career counseling. The authors present an overview of qualitative career assessment and its theoretical underpinnings and propose suggestions that could guide the development of qualitative career assessment instruments.
The history of basic interests helps explain their under-use as a meaningful dimension in the interpretation of career inventories. Research and reflection support new attention to basic interests for four reasons: (a) basic interests may be more optimal cognitive categories than other levels of classification, (b) the RIASEC arrangement of general occupational types may not adequately represent the complexity of the interest space, (c) the interest space itself may be differently conceptualized by men and by women, and (d) the realities of work in this technological era are fundamentally different than they were when occupational inventories such as the Strong Interest Inventory(TM) (Campbell, 1977) were designed.
This qualitative study examined the issues and events that led 221 women to an urban, commuter campus of 16,000 students located in the midwestern part of the United States. Specifically, role exit theory was used as a tool to explain why the majority of these women stated that their past experiences (identities) before enrollment played a major part in determining their choice of academic major and their level of involvement in campus activities. Practical applications of role exit theory for counselors include issues of role orientation and loss, values clarification, and grief counseling.
This study examined high school students' selected work values in six countries. The data were analyzed for between-country correlation. Also, the data were analyzed with sex as a variable. The findings indicated selected work values were more similar than dissimilar across countries and cultures. Gender specific results suggested a higher degree of transnational agreement among girls than among their male peers.
One of Donald Super's most important contributions of career counseling was the career model, the idea that one person's sequence of work positions constitutes a whole and unique career. In 1954, he advocated a method for predicting career patterns called the Thematic-Extrapolation Method (TEM). TEM is described and summarized in three identifiable steps. Recent writings from developmental, psychodynamic, and narrative approaches to career counseling suggest innovative revisions and elaborations on the original method. A modified TEM remains a promising, but largely untried, career counseling technique.
Career and personal counseling are inextricably intertwined. Career problems have a strong emotional component. Career indecision and procrastination may be better interpreted as zeteophobia, the fear of career exploration. Trait and factor theory pictures career counseling as unrealistically simplistic and leads neophytes to view it as boring. Training all counselors to integrate career and personal counseling would lead to better service for clients.
This study examined whether differences exist between student and counselor perceptions of work activities performed by the latter group in a large Southern California community college. Participants responded to a 40-item questionnaire indicating whether tasks were actually performed, and whether they ought be performed by counselors when providing career guidance. Chi-square with Yates's correction for continuity and Fisher's Exact Test were used to analyze the data. Statistically significant results indicated that students did not believe that counselors were actually performing the majority of tasks commonly and ideally associated with career counseling services. Although students and counselors agreed on ideal career counselor work activities, counselor responses revealed no difference between their actual and ideal duties.
This special issue of The Career Development Quarterly presents the outcomes from an international symposium, titled International Perspectives on Career Development, jointly sponsored by the International Association for Educational and Vocational Guidance and the National Career Development Association. The articles in this special issue discuss international perspectives on and comparative approaches to educational and vocational guidance that differentiate career development practices in different nations. In addition to the articles in this issue, a selection of papers presented at the symposium has been jointly published in a thematic issue of the International Journal for Educational and Vocational Guidance, 5(2).
To examine the influence of gender and gender role on anger experiences in the workplace, 257 adult students completed narratives describing their anger-provoking issues and anger expression. Seven issues were identified: work performance of coworkers, work performance of supervisors, relationships with coworkers, relationships with supervisors, dealing with the public, work performance of subordinates, and work context issues. Analyses revealed that gender did not influence the types of issues cited or workers' anger expressions. Although gender role did not influence anger expression, androgynous and feminine persons were more likely to cite relationships with coworkers as anger provoking than were undifferentiated persons.
This study investigated relationships among factors hypothesized as related to job loss grief. A summary grief score correlated positively with time since job loss and number of dependents, and negatively with length of notice. Perceived reemployment prospects and income loss related positively to some grief index subscales, as did the condition of living on one's own. Job duration correlated negatively with some grief responses. Implications for counseling and avenues for future research are discussed.
The present study indicated that both attachment bonds and self-rated attachment style were significantly related to fear of commitment and, to a lesser extent, career decision-making self-efficacy. Given previous research showing that fear of commitment is related to career indecisiveness and floundering, the possible importance of attention to attachment bonds and styles in career counseling is suggested.
The authors summarize the career counseling and development literature that appeared during 2000 in refereed journals, book chapters, and full-length books. The review of literature is divided into 5 major categories: (a) theoretical and conceptual advances, (b) career counseling and development of identified populations, (c) assessment in career counseling and development, (d) career counselling programs and interventions, and (e) resources for the professional development of career counselors and vocational psychologists.
This article reviews the career literature published in 1999 that focused on issues related to the identification and implementation of career choices. The discussion was organized in 3 major areas: publications related to theoretical approaches, new assessment instruments, and career interventions and programs.
The authors present an overview of the discussion and presentations that took place concerning techniques and assessment in educational and vocational guidance at the recent symposium International Perspectives on Career Development. Two topics were examined. The 1st focused on the theoretical foundations of and psychometric issues in career assessment. The 2nd focused on the practice of career assessment and the use of career measures, particularly in cultural contexts for which the measures were not originally developed.
This study explored a career readiness typology of 629 8th-grade students using the Career Factors Inventory. Data revealed developmentally appropriate elevated needs for information, specifically self-knowledge. In addition, cluster analysis demonstrated the heterogeneity of career development needs of 8th-grade students. Typal membership revealed little variance on sociodemographic factors. Career development implications are presented.
Semistructured interviews were conducted with 16 Israeli adolescents and young adults with mild mental retardation to examine their perceptions of the world of work. A consensual qualitative strategy of analysis (C. E. Hill, B. I. Thompson, & E. N. Williams, 1997) yielded 4 domains (Definitions of Work, Reasons for Working, Self-Awareness, Knowledge About the World of Work) and 12 categories. Although respondents showed strong willingness to participate in the world of work, they had little information regarding this realm. Implications are discussed for career development programs targeting Young persons with mental retardation and community and family involvement in Such programs.
Job search clubs for international students were evaluated. Participants (67% women, 33% men) were 24 students, representing 7 countries and 17 graduate programs. Pre/posttest measures were completed. Significant increases were noted in 5 job search activities. Participants had greater career self-efficacy, vocational identity, and required less information regarding their occupational choice. Overall, the program was highly rated. Content analysis of open-ended evaluation items revealed suggestions for program improvements. It indicated (a) the importance of discussing the U.S. culture; (b) increases in confidence, skills, and progress in the job search; and (c) positive feelings about the intervention.
This article reviews professional literature published in 2004 related to career counseling and career development. The literature is divided into 4 broad areas: professional issues, career theory and concepts, career interventions and practice, and career assessment and technology. The authors summarize and discuss the implications of the findings for career counseling practice and research.
Important changes in career guidance practices that occurred during the 20th century can be partly explained by evolution of the contexts (notably, forms of work organization) in which these practices took place. What are the ultimate goals of today's practices? It seems unlikely that the individual development model, prevalent in guidance for several decades, could stand up to ethical questioning of its presumptions. The author suggests another model-that of human development founded on the following basic principle: to help individuals achieve their own humanity by helping others to achieve theirs, fully and each in their own way.
This article demonstrates how the INCOME model (S. Beveridge, S. Heller Craddock, J. Liesener, M. Stapleton, & D. Hershenson, 2002; D. Hershenson & J. Liesener, 2003), developed with special reference to persons with disabilities and from diverse backgrounds, provides a framework for organizing, selecting, and implementing concepts from career theories and career intervention practices. Rather than using stages or processes typical of existing career development theories, this framework uses J. E. Helms's (1995) multicultural construct of statuses, which may occur or recur in any order or combination. The 6 career statuses in the INCOME framework, which occur across demographic and cultural groups, are Imagining, iNforming, Choosing, Obtaining, Maintaining, and Exiting.
The authors review the trends in the use of computers in the delivery and support of career guidance and counseling identified at the symposium International Perspectives on Career Development. The papers presented emphasized that 20th-century computer-based systems continue to be used, mainly delivered via the World Wide Web. These systems are enhanced through audio, video, graphics, strategies to provide needs assessment, and support by cybercounselors or expert system design. The papers also revealed a new trend: the use of elegant Web sites to store and search immense libraries of resources needed by professionals and clients and to facilitate communication and collaboration among professionals in cyberspace. Concerns, issues, and resources related to many areas, including the readiness of clients to use computer-based systems, were also raised; existing sources of guidelines are noted.
This study investigated cultural dimensions of career decision-making difficulties using the Career Decision-Making Difficulties Questionnaire. Career decision-making difficulties were compared among White, African, Hispanic, and Asian American high school and University students at U.S. schools. Results indicated Asian American students perceived significantly more difficulties in career decision making than other groups, whereas White American students perceived the fewest difficulties. Asian American students reported more difficulties than White and Hispanic American students before the process and more difficulties than White and African American students during the process. Findings are discussed based on perspectives of cultural differences.
The authors assessed the relative contributions of social support and interest-occupation congruence in job satisfaction and tenure. Congruence predicted 13% of the variance in job satisfaction for men, but it was not a significant predictor of job satisfaction for women. Social support accounted for 10% of the variance in job satisfaction for women but was not a significant predictor For men. Neither congruence nor social support predicted tenure. Implications for vocational counseling are discussed.
The Career Theory in an International Perspective group highlighted 7 approaches: action theory, self-construction model, transition model, dynamics of entering the workforce, narrative in career guidance, dilemma approach, and interactive identity construction. Three main characteristics appear to be common to these different contributions: (a) emphasis on contexts and cultural diversities, (b) selfconstruction or development emphasis, and (c) a constructivist perspective. Such conceptualizations are quite distinct from the methods and tools most often used by career and school counselors in their daily activities. A proliferation of models was noted. The need for new models, methods, and materials probably originates (a) in the diversity of societal questions emerging in the field of career development and self-construction and (b) in some differing points of view regarding goals of personal and career development interventions.
The concept of career rehabilitation, a paradigm that proposes integrating perspectives from vocational rehabilitation and career development, is introduced. Counselors are encouraged to assess how vocational handicaps secondary to a disabling problem can affect a client over his or her worklife and to adopt a life-span approach to career decision making of people with disabilities. Four common vocational handicaps are discussed: diminished access to work opportunities, need for workplace accommodations, employer bias in hiring and advancement, and diminished worklife expectancy. Counselors testifying in legal forums are encouraged to pursue scholarship on the career development of people with disabilities.
This study examined parents' perceptions of sources of career information for their children. A nationally representative sample of parents of high school seniors indicated that persons working in the seniors' career fields of interest, school counselors, schools, books and magazines, and vocational schools and community colleges were viewed positively as career information resources. Implications for career development professionals are discussed.
The authors examined whether college students' race was related to the modal race of their identified career role models, the number of identified career role models, and their perceived influence from such models. Consistent with A. Bandura's (1977, 1986) social learning theory, students tended to have role models whose race was the same as their own, and this finding held among career role models who were not members of students' families. Caucasian and racial minority Students did not differ respecting overall number of, and perceived influence from, career role models. Career intervention and research implications are discussed.
Helping individuals adapt to changing environments is a major strength of career development practice. Additional strengths are a solid theoretical framework, effective assessment tools and technology, and a clear professional identity. Areas of weakness include the lack of integration of contextual factors into career intervention strategies, poor communication between practitioners and researchers, insufficient attention to underserved populations, and inadequate training in Counselor education programs. Changes in the economy and ill social structures require that people possess adaptive skills; therefore, career collabselors should expand their efforts to help clients construct their lives, collaborate with other professionals, and advocate for clients.
The article reviews the practice and research literature in career counseling and development in 1998. The Literature is presented and discussed under the following topical headings: contexts and populations, career processes, transitions, career assessment, and career counseling, services and programs.
The author, on the basis of an analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of the existing literature as well as the relevant opportunities and threats, proposes future directions for career counseling with lesbian, gay male, bisexual male and female, and transgendered persons. Suggestions include efforts for theory development, empirical research, career assessment, counseling practice, and counselor education.
In this article, the career decision making of lesbian, gay, and bisexual individuals is discussed in the framework of personal (interests, values, and skills) and environmental factors and their interactive influences. Suggestions for research and practice are proposed.
The authors examined career-related uncertainties perceived by college students in Taiwan. Five hundred thirty-two Taiwanese students responded to a free-response instrument containing 3 questions related to career uncertainties: (a) the sources of career uncertainty, (b) the experiences at the moment of feeling uncertainty, and (c) coping efficacies toward the uncertainty. Responses were sorted into categories within each question based on the grounded theory methodology (B. G. Glaser & A. L. Strauss, 1967). A hypothetical model was developed to describe college students' perceptions of career uncertainties, experiences of feeling uncertainty, and coping efficacy toward the uncertainty.
Genograms have been used successfully in career counseling with adults; however, there has been limited use of genograms in career counseling with elementary, middle, and high school children. This article focuses on the benefits of using genograms and the reasons for them to be integrated into the comprehensive developmental guidance programs used by professional school counselors.
This is a descriptive study in an area significantly lacking validation. The focus of the study was the work values held by mortuary science students from 3 educational programs in the Midwest. The Values Scale (D. Nevill & D. Super, 1989) was used to measure the career-related values of a sample group of 116. According to participants' scores, the 5 subscales of Economic Security, Achievement, Personal Development, Ability Utilization, and Economic Rewards were the highest ranking. Work values were examined by gender, race, and other demographics.
This article details the current knowledge regarding the provision of culturally appropriate career services to gay and lesbian clients. It is divided into 5 parts: history and context for the delivery of career counseling services to gay and lesbian clients, counselor self-preparation for working with gay and lesbian clients, client-focused interventions useful for counseling with gay and lesbian clients, program-focused interventions useful for addressing the special issues that this group presents, and appropriate advocacy or social action interventions. Issues of multiple cultural identities and the intersection of lesbian and gay issues with race and ethnicity are also addressed.
The extent to which Basic Confidence Scales predicted career decision-making self-efficacy was studied in a sample of 627 undergraduate students. Six confidence variables accounted for 49% of the variance in career decision-making self-efficacy. Leadership confidence was the most important, but confidence in science, mathematics, writing, using technology, and cultural sensitivity all contributed significant incremental variance. There were some differences as a function of race and gender, but leadership confidence was the most significant predictor in all subgroups. Implications for educational and career counseling are discussed.
Extrapolating from D. H. Barlow (2000), the authors explored whether perceived control moderated the relation between coping with career indecision and choice anxiety among 126 women in low-level jobs. Analyses of the women's career indecision, coping, perceived control, and career choice anxiety scores through regression identified the moderator effect. Perceived control interacted with problem-focused coping to increase accountable variance in choice anxiety (p < .05), Women perceiving high control and doing more problem-focused coping reported lower anxiety than did women doing comparable coping but perceiving lower control. Implications are discussed for interventions with women in low-level jobs.
The article outlines the development of partnerships across 3 employment-related government ministries, in a context of organizational restructuring and downsizing. The article describes a consultation process conducted with workers from 2 provincial ministries and 1 federal government ministry regarding effective collaboration to assess unemployed clients' employability needs. In individual and focus group meetings, the workers developed a process that involved the cooperation and involvement of those hom all 3 ministries in offering and monitoring the effectiveness of a needs assessment program.
The Latack-Dozier (1986) model of career growth through job loss was examined using a sample of 515 involuntarily displaced professionals. Results supported the model and identified variables most predictive of career growth for men and women. The results also partially supported the hypothesis that men and women rely on different forms of social support after job loss. The Latack-Dozier model is discussed in light of the findings. In addition, implications for dismissed workers, for career development specialists, and for practitioners are discussed.
Dependent decision makers form a significant population of students and adults who seek help from career counselors. This study investigated the learning style characteristics of dependent decision makers in an urban community college setting. The results suggest that the dependent decision makers as a group may have reduced motivation for learning, show limited persistence, and take less responsibility for their learning. Because of these learning style characteristics, we recommend that these characteristics be considered when making counseling interventions and instructional modifications when working with dependent decision makers.
The Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, the World Bank, and the European Commission have conducted reviews of the career guidance policies and practices in 37 countries. The 37 country studies, together with the 3 synthesis reports and a number of other commissioned papers, constitute the largest database on career guidance policies that has ever been collected. The present article, based in large part on the 3 synthesis reports, addresses the finding relative to 5 key policy issues: rationale, evidence, delivery, resources, and leadership.
The authors present a review of the 2002 career development literature. The literature review is divided into the following areas: career theory, career assessment, career counseling interventions and practice, career counseling training and professional issues, and international issues in career counseling. The authors discuss the implications of the findings in this literature for career counseling practice.
The authors focus on career counseling from a cultural perspective, using the proxy construct of race/ethnicity. They briefly describe traditional career counseling and critique the degree to which the myriad cultural contexts that shape clients' career development are incorporated into vocational theories and practice. They conducted a meta-analysis of research that has investigated the relationship between culture and vocational choice variables and concluded (a) that race/ethnicity differences do not greatly affect career aspirations but (b) that there are differences among racial/ethnic groups in perceptions of career-related opportunities and barriers.
This article features the description of a 5-session group experience designed to facilitate exploration of familial influence on career decision making. The authors adapted traditional family genograms to explicate occupational patterns, themes, and values and to examine career choice in relation to influences derived from family experiences. A sequence of activities, students' responses, and precautions is provided.
Two samples of 16- to 19-year-old adolescents From differed contexts were compared. Whereas young East Germans had experienced an educational system that offered relatively little choice, West Germans had experienced more leeway. In 1991, youth from East Germany reported more career maturity than did same-aged adolescents from the West. Different variables predicted career maturity in the 2 groups. Whereas person-related variables predicted career maturity in both groups, family and peer contexts were relevant only among the West German youth. In 1996, when differences in social context had greatly diminished, these differences had disappeared. Results confirm the usefulness of a cross-cultural and contextual approach to career development.
In this article, the authors propose that counseling can assist people who are in their late 40s and early 50s and who are about to enter retirement or are in retirement to become aware of their perceptions of their vocational roles. It can do so through encouraged reflection on, reminiscence about, and definition of the various aspects of their work roles, how those roles became formed, and how those roles played out in the context of their family and social relationships and across various contexts. Through such counseling, these older adults can develop ''vocational scripts''-adaptive views of the self at work that enhance personal perceptions of productivity and agency. Selected theoretical bases for the vocational script concept are summarized. Three distinct counseling phases and methods are described.
Former participants in a high school enrichment program for girls interested in science careers were surveyed 1 to 2 years after high school graduation. After reporting their college major, they completed measures of science self-efficacy and quality of emotional bonds with parents. Of the 41 women, 5 were not enrolled in college. Those actually majoring in science (n = 23) reported significantly higher science self-efficacy than those who were undecided or had chosen nonscience majors (n = 13). Science self-efficacy was significantly negatively associated with recollections of fathers as having been highly controlling and likely to use a love withdrawal parenting style.
The authors explore the construct of profile elevation on interest inventories results. They speak to the need for career counselors to maximize their use of the interest inventory and how they can do that by properly interpreting profile elevation. Profile elevation is defined, and correlates of high and low profile elevation are presented. The common interpretive interaction that occurs between profile elevation and differentiation is explored. The authors also present a case of low profile elevation and the career counseling interventions and considerations used with the client.
Advances in medical treatment have greatly extended the life span and quality of life of persons living with HIV, with the nature of the disease evolving from causing an early death to chronic, manageable illness. Career counselors will increasingly be called upon to assist persons living with HIV. This article provides an overview of HIV disease and of career-related issues unique to persons living with HIV. Career counseling interventions are discussed from an ecological perspective.
Researchers and practitioners do not fully Understand the nature and extent of actual and perceived barriers in lesbians' career development (S. L. Morrow, P. A. Gore, & B. W. Campbell, 1996). In this Study, 10 lesbian women, ages 42 to 64 years, were interviewed and asked to identify barriers to career development due to sexual identity. Integration of sexual orientation in D. E. Super's ( 1990) Life-Span, Life-Space approach is proposed.
The authors examined self-efficacy and perceived importance of several career counseling competencies among counselors in school settings (N = 567). The social cognitive career theory was used as a conceptual framework. Participants completed a modified version of the Career Counseling Self-Efficacy Scale (CCSES) that also included an importance rating. A principal components analysis was used to examine the factorial structure of the modified CCSES and to determine the generalizabilty of the original CCSES findings to practicing school counselors. In addition, counselors' importance ratings were compared to those of a panel of counselor educators and career guidance consultants.
The purpose of this study was to understand how intergenerational family conflict and relational-interdependent self-construal influence the career decision status of Chinese American youths. Participants were 129 Chinese American youths, with ages ranging from 14 to 21 years. Results from regression analysis indicated that high intergenerational family conflict was predictive of career indecision. High relational-interdependent self-construal, on the other hand, was predictive of career certainty. Implications for counseling and future research are also discussed.
This annual review of the research and practice literature related to career counseling and development published during 2003 is presented in 6 major areas: professional issues, career assessment, career development, career theory, career interventions, and technology. The authors discuss the implications of the findings in this literature for career counseling practice.
In this article we argue that career counseling with adults is the exploration of personal identity and meaning, both of which are fundamental to an individual's survival, well-being, and family life-style.
This study tested a causal model, based on social cognitive career theory (SCCT; R, W. Lent, S. D. Brown, & G. Hackett, 1994, 2000), of math and science career interests among 6th-grade adolescents (N = 318). Consistent with SCCT, it was found that career gender-typing, mother's and father's support for pursuing math and science careers, as well as the structure of the family itself (2-parent intact vs. single parent) predicted young adolescents' math self-efficacy; career gender-typing and mother's support predicted math outcome expectations; and math self-efficacy and outcome expectations predicted math and science career interests. Counselor recommendations based on these findings are included.
Using the Theory of Work Adjustment (TWA; R. V Dawis & L. H. Lofquist, 1984; L. H. Lofquist & R. V Dawis, 1969) as a framework for identifying potential career challenges for lesbians, the authors explore the relationship between outness and discrimination and the four primary components of TWA. Career counseling implications are discussed, and specific suggestions are made for counselors.
Student training is a critical but often overlooked aspect of the mentoring process. Composite mentoring, involving the strategic selection of a diverse set of mentors, is proposed to guide students to take a more active role in their own mentoring experiences. A mentoring program with composite mentoring as a guiding framework was designed and implemented for college women pursuing science careers. The effectiveness of the program is illustrated, and students reported enhanced mentoring and career-related experiences. Implications for advising, career counseling, and mentoring program design are discussed.
This article reviews 50 years of empirical literature on career decision making, summarizing 10 things the field knows for sure. An anti-introspectivist view of career decision making is then presented, developed by applying findings from cognitive and experimental social psychology to career decision making. This view holds that most processing performed by the human mind for decision making and behavior initiation is not performed at a conscious level and that reflection on those processes may be futile, and detrimental to good decisions. Although the anti-introspectivist perspective challenges many strongly held assumptions, it provides a plausible explanation of some of the difficulties encountered by decision makers and those who counsel them.
An independent evaluation of the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB) Career Exploration Program was conducted using nationally representative samples of high school students. The sample consisted of current ASVAB Program participants (n = 255) and two control groups of nonparticipants (n = 233, n = 189). A pretest-posttest design showed that participation in the ASVAB Program increased career exploration knowledge and reduced diffusion and approach-approach forms of career indecision, as assessed by the Career Decision Scale (S. Osipow, 1986).
This study examined how background and high school variables affected participants in either realizing their potential by completing a bachelor's degree or experiencing lost talent by not completing a bachelor's degree. A sample of participants who had demonstrated above average cognitive ability and had high postsecondary educational goals when in 8th grade was selected from the National Education Longitudinal Study of 1988 (national longitudinal data from 1988 to 2000; National Education, 2002). Several background and high school variables had strong effects on degree completion. Results were used to develop the Realized Potential or Lost Talent model. Implications for helping young people in their educational-career development are included.
Parsons's tripartite model suggests that gaining information about the world of work is a critical factor in vocational decision making. This article compares and contrasts data from around 1909, when F. Parsons's Choosing a Vocation was published, with contemporary data on the workplace and the American worker. Data on other contextual factors, such as demographic trends, are also presented. There are surprising similarities between Parsons's time and the present, and also obvious differences. The author suggests that having information about occupations is still an essential component of career counseling, and ideas are presented for updating knowledge about the increasingly complex world of work.
This analysis of the career counseling profession's strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats emphasizes the importance of the profession's contributions to fostering equality in a democratic society. Career counseling professionals and their National Career Development Association are well positioned to expand their concentration on fostering the career development of individuals to encompass advocacy about public policy and agency in changing systems. Advances in the use of technology, attention to multicultural issues, and advocacy of holistic models have the potential to enrich the career Counseling profession's contributions to individual development and social equality.
This case response centers on the client Sue, a professional mediator who seeks counseling to resolve a conflict with her employer that threatens her vocational identity (M. C. Rehfuss, 2003). R B. Baltes's (1997) Selective Optimization With Compensation model of human development and J. Heckhausen and R. Schulz's (1995) Life-Span Theory of Control are used to frame Sue's career development, identify her current control orientation, and assist her in making the transition from compensation to an optimizing strategy. Such a strategy aims to preserve her vocational identity while satisfying the needs of her employer.
This article is a summary of the literature published in 2001 related to career counseling and career development. The review is designed to provide information to both career practitioners and researchers, with the focus on integration of practice and research. This summary of literature is organized around 5 primary areas: (a) career development, (b) career and vocational theories, (c) career interventions, (d) career assessment, and (e) professional issues. Within the framework of this review, attention is also given to contextual factors including gender, race or ethnicity, sexual orientation, and nationality.
Although teenage parenthood is recognized by many counselors as a developmental identity crisis, it rarely has been viewed as a developmental career crisis. This article suggests developmental career assessment and counseling procedures for use with teenage parents.
Learning is essential not only for students to develop the basic employability skills required for the school-to-work transition, but also for the development of work habits, beliefs, interests, and values. Career development counselors can apply a learning perspective to (a) use assessment instruments for stimulating new learning, not merely for matching existing characteristics to current environments, (b) achieve emotional and performance outcomes as well as cognitive outcomes, and (c) measure success by the extent to which clients continue to be engaged in learning activities leading to the creation of satisfying lives for themselves, not merely by measures of decisiveness and congruence.
The critical role of the timing of person-context interactions is important in the conceptualization of the school-to-work transition. It is argued that career maturity, with its focus on the individual and its ties to stage models and notions of age-appropriateness, gives insufficient attention to the particular contexts of time and culture within which it may be observed. The use of recent advances in developmental theory is suggested as a viable alternative for understanding developmental transitions. Findings from the research literature and from a recent study of young adults from former East Germany and former West Germany are cited in support of this proposal. These findings highlight limitations of the construct of career maturity in showing how individual differences and contextual factors contribute to the school-to-work transition in contrasting environments of former East and West Germany.
Realistic client expectations about career counseling are essential to positive client outcomes. The authors investigated a videotaped intervention designed to influence participants' expectations about career counseling using a pretest/posttest experimental design. As measured by the Expectations About Counseling-Brief Form (H. E. A. Tinsley, 1982), undergraduate participants who watched the videotaped intervention significantly increased their expectations of personal commitment to career counseling and decreased their expectations of counselor expertise compared with participants who watched a control videotape. A secondary hypothesis, that changes in expectations would positively affect attitudes toward career counseling as measured by the Attitudes Toward Career Counseling Scale (A. B. Rochlen, J. J. Mohr, & B. K. Hargrove, 1999), was not supported.
Thirty-one downsizing Survivors from both the private and public sector were interviewed to determine incidents that either helped or hindered their transition through I or more organizational downsizings. A critical incident technique was used to analyze and organize the data around themes that emerged. Themes were represented by both positive and negative incidents and were grouped using transition phases. Results support and add new detail and insight into topics developed in previous studies. Implications are discussed for organizations' handling of downsizing or restructuring as well as reducing negative and enhancing positive influences and events. Counseling recommendations are offered for easing survivors through the transition.
Content analyses were used to explore alternative sources and functions of developmental support other than mentoring among nonfaculty university employees. The majority of participants reported that they had an alternative source of developmental support outside of a mentoring relationship, that the developmental functions (i.e., kinds of support) provided by these sources varied, and that there were differences in sources and functions by participant age and gender. The alternative source of support most frequently mentioned was coworkers. The results also suggested that alternative sources of support may provide many of the functions associated with traditional mentors, although the full range may not be represented.
This article explores the nature and scope of support groups that focus on job and career issues. A review and analysis of such groups in single organizations, on the Internet, and in other venues is presented, as well as related writings drawn from both the support group and career development literature. Implications for career development practice and research are then offered. Although the purposes, structure, formats, and outcomes of these groups vary, when viewed collectively, they represent potentially helpful adjunctive support for clients who are receiving assistance from professional career counselors and developers.
This study examines the effects of the use of structuring on participants' impressions of a counselor during an initial career counseling session. A total of 232 undergraduate students viewed a videotape of an initial career counseling session. Both groups observed the identical tape with the exception that one group was additionally shown a brief structuring segment. The 2 groups were compared across the variables of attractiveness, expertness, and trustworthiness as measured by the Counselor Rating Form. The participants were also asked to rate their willingness to see a counselor about a career issue before and after viewing the videotape. Significant differences were found across the dependent measures. Implications of the findings for counselors are discussed.
These findings are from the first phase of a 5-year longitudinal interpretive study that seeks an understanding of how students enrolled in academically low-achieving schools located in economically disadvantaged areas socially construct their academic and career aspirations. This article describes the general perceptions that parents/guardians of 7th graders hold regarding the future of the students. The research revealed that although family support was evident, many students seemed to develop their ideas about their future in a nondirective environment in which parents/guardians frequently evoked a sense of regret about their own earlier decision making. Implications for practitioners and researchers are provided.
The authors examined the impact of sense of coherence on the career thought processes of a sample of college students, A. Antonovsky (1987) defined sense of coherence as die global orientation that the world is comprehensible, manageable, and meaningful. Study participants completed die Sense of Coherence Scale (A. Antonovsky, 1987) and the Career Thoughts Inventory (CTI; J. P. Sampson, G. W. Peterson, J. G. Lenz, R. C. Reardon, &: D. E, Saunders, 1996). Multivariate tests indicated a medium relationship between sense of coherence and CTI Total and subscale scores; sense of coherence accounted for 14% of the variance. Univariate tests also indicated a medium relationship between sense of coherence and each subscale.
This article considers social cognitive career theory (SCCT; Lent, Brown, & Hackett, 1994) as a vantage point from which to view the school-to-work. transition process. Rather than emphasizing the period just before high school graduation, SCCT focuses on 6 developmentally linked themes that unfold throughout the school years. An emphasis on these themes (formation of self-efficacy and outcome beliefs, interest development, interest-goal linkages, translation of goals into actions, performance skills, negotiation of transition supports and barriers) suggests targets for developmental and remedial interventions that promote students' career development across the school years and after work entry.
This study sought to determine whether self-estimates of work-relevant abilities can improve upon the validity of test estimates (scores). Validity for career planning applications was the focus. The study (final sample of 1,620 college students) used 9 self-estimates and test estimates to predict certainty-screened Occupational choices grouped by J. L. Holland (1997) types. The addition of ability self-estimates to test estimates substantially improved upon the validity of test estimates alone. Study results (together with previous research) suggest that ability self-estimates can provide efficient additions or alternatives to test estimates during career planning, while substantially broadening the range of abilities under consideration.
College students (20 women, 14 men) seeking career counseling services at a university career center participated in this exploratory investigation. A 2 (DISCOVER treatment) x 2 (counseling treatment) research design was used to evaluate the individual and combined effects of DISCOVER (ACT, 1998) and counseling on participants' career decision-making self-efficacy and career decision-making attributional style. Findings revealed a significant effect of the use of DISCOVER on participants' career decision-making self-efficacy and their sense of control over the career decision-making process. Results are discussed regarding the implications for career counseling and ideas for further research in this domain.
The theory of work adjustment (TWA; R. V. Dawis & L. H. Lofquist, 1984; L. H. Lofquist & R. V. Dawis, 1969, 1991) is useful in addressing the career Counseling needs of retirees who want to continue working but Who need to explore their career choices before settling on a new occupation or job. This article examines some of the challenges that midlife and older adults face as they plan postretirement careers. Information about TWA and a case example are provided to assist counselors in understanding how TWA can be applied to retirement career counseling.
Trends in career counseling with lesbian and gay clients are reviewed along with discussions on considering lesbian women and gay men a different cultural minority. The role and direction of career development with lesbian and gay clients is presented based on current information regarding employment discrimination, the decision to pass as heterosexual on the job, counselor and student training issues, age-related factors, and differences between gay men and lesbian women with respect to careers. Concrete suggestions are made to career counselors who wish to prepare themselves to work with this group or to extend their effectiveness, and suggestions for services are also presented.
Individuals who are diagnosed with a serious mental illness encounter a variety of barriers that can impede their career development. In this article, the career barriers of clients who have a severe mental illness are reviewed, and a developmental approach to career counseling with this population is described. A case example is provided to illustrate the complex process of developmental career Counseling with people who are seriously impaired by a psychiatric illness.
This study explores the initial careers of two target groups of young adults in seven European countries. Career patterns have been constructed through cluster analysis on data gathered from the young adults through a retrospective self-report procedure covering a period of 2.5 years. Six career patterns have been identified across countries by the activities taking place (employment, various educational preparations, unemployment, military or civil service) and have been further described by personal and work-related variables as well as by meaning of work indices (work centrality, intrinsic versus extrinsic work orientations, and societal norms about working) and psychological well-being in the second year on the labor market. Suggestions for further research as well as the implications for career counseling, career education, organizational career guidance and development have been given.
The authors identify and discuss the main themes from the discourse on the internationalization of educational and vocational guidance at the 2004 Symposium on International Perspectives on Career Development, cosponsored by the International Association for Educational and Vocational Guidance and the National Career Development Association. Participants from 46 countries discussed international perspectives on and comparative features of educational and vocational guidance. They concentrated on issues of designing and adapting models, methods, and materials for career education and counseling. Three additional themes revolved around the importance of public policy initiatives, training enough practitioners to meet the growing international need for career services, and the promise of information technology for expanding the delivery of educational and vocational guidance and for supporting career counselors.
It has been widely recognized that, in order to automate the map generalization process, cartographic knowledge needs to be formalized. One method of knowledge acquisition is to analyse existing maps. Previous studies have concentrated on describing the phenomena on the surface. A typical example is the percentage change of the number of symbols or the percentage of open space on smaller scale maps. This study aims to go one step further, i.e. to analyse the association such changes with thematic attributes. In this study, road features on topographic maps of Hong Kong from 1:1000 to 1:200 000 are studied; six types of thematic attributes, i.e. `type', `length', `width', `number of lanes', `number of traffic ways' and `connectivity', are considered; and two statistic parameters, Lambda and Somers' Delta, are employed. It has; been discovered that the dependence of road elimination on these attributes occurs in the following order: type (0.73), length (0.53), number of lanes (0.48), number of traffic directions (0.41), width (0.36) and connectivity (0.19). If these numbers are normalized into percentages, then these values become: type (27%), length (20%), number of lanes (18%), number of traffic directions (15%), width (13%) and connectivity (7%). Such results could be used to formulate an overall weight to determine whether a particular road should be deleted, merged or combined in the generalization process, in order to retain a certain proportion of roads at a smaller scale.
The face of the geographical information industry and its applications are evolving as rapidly as the landscape of Great Britain. In an increasingly digital age where technology advances by the day, how is Ordnance Survy, Britain's mapping agency for over 200 years, positionimg itself? The Director General and Chief Executive explains how Ordinance Survey is fusing heritage and innovation to lead the way in the geographical information revolution.
In France, with the emergence of the geographical research group RECLUS, a new research organisation model has developed that benefits both geography and cartography, the latter through its emphasis on computer-production of thematic maps and its introduction and stimulation of the use of cartographic software packages. The trademark of the RECLUS research group is its use of choremes, cartographic models that retain dynamic and hierarchic relationships in spatial representation. These have been developed by Roger Brunet into a sign-language with which relational models of regions can be built, stressing aspects of spatial organisation not rendered by traditional maps.
This paper presents the cartographic elements of a system for classifying and visualizing high-dimensional geographic datasets. The system has been developed as part of the Land Ocean Interactions in the Coastal Zone (LOICZ) project. The goal of the system is to develop regional and global typologies of coastal zones using large multi-variable datasets. Our implementation brings together statistical clustering algorithms with visualization capabilities to allow easy analysis and comprehension of the results. The two main tasks of the visualization are to allow for discrimination of multiple classes and to show relationships between those classes. These are accomplished in two different visual presentations. In both cases, the system selects colors appropriate to the purpose. In the latter case - showing relationships - the system uses a novel iterative refinement algorithms to select the colors. The results show that the system is successful at both generating the classes and visualizing the relationships between them.
Colour is a very important visual variable and is often used for the communication of information in maps, graphics and diagrams. In cartography, the use of colour, in both a traditional and an electronic medium, has been widely discussed. With the growing use of a range of computer software (cartographic, remote sensing, Geographical Information Systems (GIS), and more recently the Internet or World Wide Web) as the main environment in which to design and create maps, and the availability of more sophisticated hardware, there is now an even greater opportunity and freedom of choice to make use of colour as a vital component in the communication of spatial information. The question is how to handle all these colours. This paper explores the importance of both the choice and use of colour in a paper and an electronic medium, and examines some of the ways in which more careful choice of colour can be encouraged in practice to ensure that the growing freedom of use considers the correct use of colour.
Large scale, detailed maps have been produced and maintained by forestry agencies in many parts of central Europe since the mid nineteenth century. This paper describes a series of maps supporting the management of a forest area in Austria from 1872 until 1996. The last edition of this series marks the end of art era of forest mapping based on traditional surveying and manual cartography. The historical development of this map series is examined in terms of the type and amount of spatial information. It was found that the locational accuracy of the various maps does not significantly vary. Historical forest maps provide a record of past management practice and may therefore be usefully incorporated into spatial information systems to support current management. Several approaches to converting the forest maps of various dates to digital form were tested and found to give some improvement in metric quality. The remaining relative locational disagreements hamper the incorporation of these historical data in a GIS database.
This paper describes some algebraic models for the automated generalization of area-patches. These models are based on techniques developed in mathematical morphology, which is a science dealing with the form and shapes of objects, and will form an algebraic basis for area-patch generalization. These models are fully illustrated and tested. The results show that such models are very promising.
French public transport maps have a uniform style, in that they attempt to show each bus line by a different colour. Maps of different French towns attempt different solutions to the obvious problems which result, according to the number of different bus services, the service numbering conventions, and the spatial pattern of bus lines. Colours fade differentially in the Mediterranean sun. Digital methods have been recently introduced. These can facilitate the deliberate distortion of scale as an aid to legibility. In contrast, German and Spanish maps of public transport networks differ in style within each country, and from the French maps. The reasons must be sought in differences between the three countries in: (a) the modes of public transport used, (b) the amount of subsidy to public transport, and (c) the degree of political centralisation.
This paper illustrates how tithe survey maps and their accompanying apportionments lend themselves to input into a Geographical Information System and subsequently to the production of various other maps that assist in the study of the mediaeval and post-mediaeval agricultural landscape. The authors suggest that such a technique could be of great assistance to the large number of economic historians and historical geographers who continue to use the tithe as a central part of their research.
Electronic atlases possess certain advantages over their paper counterparts. However these are not achieved lightly because of the considerable differences between these media, particularly in terms of cartographic design. These problems, and the process of converting an existing atlas of marine information into an electronic version, are the subject of this paper.
This paper examines possible directions and dimensions of change in the delivery of services in map libraries, in the light of the transition from paper maps to geographical information systems. A contrast is drawn between the majority who will have little option other than 'leaving it to the labs', and a minority of better resourced collections which will seek to integrate the digital with the hard copy, often through active collaboration with other collections, data suppliers and software houses. Only through an appreciation of the diversity of spatial data, and systems for their delivery in different library contexts, can any quality of future service be guaranteed.
The author, who was John Keates' first full-time graduate student, reflects on his early years in Glasgow University learning about cartography. His mentor not only provided training and education, but inspired him to investigate, through stimulation of curiosity and experience of the inevitable associated frustrations, some of the most exciting practical and artistic techniques of the subject. Closely integrated (and essential to effective design) were the associated challenges to seek fundamental understanding of cartography, and this has process has continued.
In their pre-war heyday Bartholomew, that most famous of British commercial mapmakers, had a huge worldwide business in every sort and scale of map and atlas for every purpose; not to mention, at one time, an extensive general printing trade.(1) But, even so, their name became firmly associated in the public consciousness with one particular design of map on one particular scale - the half-inch to one mile (1:126 720) layer coloured map of Great Britain. This study deals with the early history of the phenomenon, in the context of the firm's other work. It concludes with the completion of the England and Wales series, and the moment when it could be said, in the mos elevated and objective of contexts, that the British map buyer - trade and public both - had, thanks to this map, acquired 'the Bartholomew habit'.(2)
This paper describes a prototype system for the propagation of updates between cartographic data sets at different scales. The prototype system is based on object-oriented techniques and a multiple representation database. The latter consists Of a master and a target data set together with connectivities between those objects referring to the same physical entities. The prototype is based on a conceptual framework of four steps: examination, propagation, generalization of updates and solution of spatial conflicts. The rules in these steps are triggered when an object is Edited in the master data set. In the examination step it is determined which object should be created, deleted or modified in the target data sri according to certain rules. In the propagation step the outcome of the examination step is executed. In addition, in this step the integrity of the multiple representation database is maintained, e.g. connectivities between related objects are set. In the third step the new or modified object in the tar-get data set is generalized to suit the scale of the target data set. Finally, in the last step the constraint method is used to solve the spatial conflicts caused by the update. The paper concludes with a case study. where a map produced by the prototype system is compared to a map produced manually by cartographers.
The idea that clarity of understanding can be a function of experience suggests that the more ways an image is experienced the clearer its meaning becomes. Bringing together maps and illustrations can enhance experience and enrich awareness. This paper develops this idea in relation to graphic design, stereopsis, and mapping. Research, using a red/green three dimensional (3-D) map design, examines the physiological impact of spatial data from the point of view of clarity and the direct experience of space to augment sight.
Extant manuscript sources of seven maps published in Blaeu's Atlas Novus in 1654 provide evidence for a study of the effects of engraving on map content and on the location of named places in the map. There is a measurable reduction in both the amount and in the quality of information in consequence of engraving. Whilst preparation for printing made little difference to accuracy overall, the location of some places within the map is nevertheless likely to be discernibly altered for better or for worse.
This paper is concerned with the future of the British national mapping agency in a society which is markedly different from that in which the Ordnance Survey Review Committee of 1979 worked. The objective is to ascertain which topographic information is needed, who should provide it, on what terms and through which mechanisms. Prior to making an attempt to answer these questions, the essential characteristics of Ordnance Survey (OS) are summarised as deduced from available documentary evidence1; the changing attitudes to information as a commodity, the growing competition in British mapping and the government's stringent requirements from the Survey are also outlined as just three of the many complexities which affect OS. Building upon Smith's classic 1979 paper and subsequent experience, the rationale for government involvement in mapping is examined. It is concluded that the Survey has a continuing vital role though there are a number of steps which the OS should take in order to adapt to changing circumstances.
In 1892 a government committee of inquiry into the Ordnance Survey suggested that the Survey should make a distinction between public and private second class roads at the one-inch scale. This study is confined to England and Wales and looks at the nineteenth-century practice of colouring roads on the large-scale plans, and compares the representation of coloured rural roads on early Ordnance Survey one-inch maps with near contemporary highway records of the county of Huntingdonshire, sixteen rural district councils in six counties and an estate in Suffolk. The results show, that all but four of the coloured roads on the one-inch maps in these areas are recorded as publicly maintainable highways.
This short paper describes an inexpensive method for making topographic maps to support visually impaired students. The maps are mainly for courses in geology and ecology, but maps for walking and other recreational purposes have also been produced. The method is not well suited to reproduction of multiple copies, but work is continuing to investigate replication. The paper also considers the choice of materials, scale (including vertical exaggeration) and optimum methods of labelling to meet the needs of both blind and partially sighted students. The project concentrates on making tactile maps affordable, and shows that these can be effective despite using simple tools and techniques from low cost (sometimes free, scrap) material.
This article is an updated version of a paper presented by Willemijn Simon van Leeuwen in Keele at the 35th Annual Symposium of the BCS. It reports on successive investigations into the use of recreational cycling maps by the Project Group of Cycling Maps of the Working Group on Map Use of the Netherlands' Cartographic Society. We think these investigations fit well into the tradition fostered by John Keates: practical and applied and centered around the very reasons for map-making. This is demonstrated by the fact that some of the results could immediately be used in some new map series in the Netherlands that are used effectively by recreational cyclists.
In this paper the cartographic grids engraved on two antique instruments from Iran for finding the sacred direction and distance to Mecca are discussed. It appears that these grids can be well explained in terms of the Mecca-centred retroazimuthal orthographic projection described in 1968 by J. E. Jackson. In this projection the lines of constant latitude reduce to a set of ellipses with their major axes parallel to the equation and the lines of constant longitude reduce to a set of non-equidistant straight lines parallel to the north-south direction. It is shown that the curves actually engraved on the instrument conform to this projection and can be fairly easily constructed. This interpretation of the grids on the Iranian instruments stands in contrast with another explanation, recently proposed by Kina (1999), which is based on medieval Arabic concepts such as the so-called 'method of the zijes.' Insufficiently accurate workmanship makes it impossible to distinguish between the two explanations through the study of the instruments themselves. The newly gained insight into the projection itself, however, shows that a direct relation between the Iranian maps and Islamic mappings known from the ninth century, as suggested by King, does not exist. Thus, it is concluded that it is as yet completely unknown from and where the very idea behind the Iranian cartographic grid was first conceived, and that the quest for their historical background is still open.
Cartographic generalization is one of the main difficulties when dealing with digital cartography and GIS. First works on automatic generalization of linear features were mainly devoted to algorithms of simplification, being their main target to reduce the number of co-ordinates to store. However, the use of techniques in the frequency domain provides us with a new research area. In this paper the use of wavelet filtering has shown a disposition to extract the general trend of a line, essential to reduce drastically the scale, but also to establish classifications and segmentations depending on the homogeneity and the sinuosity of the features.
Results from research on the consistent use of basic color names, on colors that look the same with impaired color vision, and on changes in color appearance caused by surrounding colors have application in cartography. These results are synthesized to recommend the following pairs of hues of use on thematic maps suited to diverging color schemes: red/blue, orange/purple, and yellow/purple. These recommendations are robust because they may be communicated verbally and require no particular color charts or color measurements for use. These color pairs will aid in producing maps of differences and of changes that can be read accurately by all map users.
This study investigates the Map of Metlatoyuca, a Mexican pictorial manuscript of early Colonial time, in the collection of the Brittish Museum. The map, which is painted on cloth, demonstrates a road and river system, place signs and genealogical records. The historical and geographical content is studied and compared with available iconographic and written historical sources. Using these ancient sources and analysing the pictograms of the place signs, the region represented on the map is identified as being located in the far northern part of the state of Puebla adjacent to Vera Cruz and Hidalgo. This assessment is confirmed by redrawing the ancient map utilising modern standards of cartography.
A new five-colour map of Aberlady Bay Local Nature Reserve and Site of Special Scientific Interest at 1:7,500 scale is published as a loose insert with the June 1993 issue of The Cartographic Journal. This accompanying paper describes the problems of producing the map at minimal cost, considers some of the cartographic issues particular to the site, and provides specification details of the compilation. Such individual map sheets, which are used for environmental planning, research and teaching, have in the past been produced mainly by universities with the support of conservancy and countryside agencies. Future production costs at universities will inevitably rise although some economies may be possible by the use of digital database methods of cartography.
This paper examines the typology, functional use, production expertise and technology of cartographic products; and their societal relevance in Nigeria. The results show that maps are produced by different sorts of professionals, and the method of map production is still largely manual. The influence of modern technologies is still not yet significant. Nevertheless, digital cartography is gradually making an impact, especially in the petroleum oil industry. It was found that 76% of the cartographic products are produced manually, whilst 24% are produced by automated and semi-automated cartographic processes. Functionally, maps and spatial data are used in various fields and for different purposes. A variance analysis showed that there is a strong structural relationship between typology and functional use of cartographic products in Nigeria. At the organisational level, however, this relationship is not valid in public and private mapping agencies. It is believed that these findings will form an important contribution to the research efforts of the ICA Commission on Maps and Spatial Data Use, and will also form a useful contribution to the development of theoretical concepts in cartography and Geographic Information Systems.
A questionnaire was designed to elicit information about the maps produced by a wide range of users of Geographical Information Systems (GIS); 114 replies were received, 95 of which were usable. II seems as though maps are widely used by GIS operators and they appear to be the primary means of representing results of a GIS analysis. Only two of the 95 respondents did not produce any map output Both maps and tables were most commonly produced for on-screen display rather than as hardcopy. The majority of users produced maps from commercially purchased data. In most cases, the maps produced were not for publication, and there was a corresponding lack of attention to design quality. Given the extensive use of maps in GIS if is hoped to develop a cartographic design system to enable users to produce meaningful maps which communicate spatial data effectively.
This paper argues for the importance of retaining a map library presence on UK university campuses at a time when many are under threat of closure, and access to geospatial data is increasingly moving to web-based services. It is suggested that the need for local expertise is undiminished and map curators need to redefine themselves as geoinformation specialists, preserving their paper map collections, but also meeting some of the challenges of GIS, and contributing to national developments in the construction of distributed geolibraries and the provision of metadata, especially with regard to local data sets.
William Senior, during the year 1600 to 1640, surveyed private estates totalling over 285000 acres located in a dozen counties of England. The result - written surveys (''terriers'') and over 150 maps (''platts'') - is a minor Domesday Book for the early 17th century.
Scientific Visualization is a growing area of computing with the underlying philosophy that displaying visual representations of data assists humans in generating ideas and hypotheses about the data. The emphasis is on the fostering of ideas as opposed to presentation of information, as in conventional cartography. Having said that, it would appear that there is much opportunity for cartographers and geographers to benefit from the computational possibilities being opened by visualization researchers, and similar for the visualization software developers and users to learn best-practice in display methods from cartographers.
This paper reports the findings of an international survey that collected data on production methods, techniques, outputs and design preferences among tactile map producers, designers and researchers worldwide. A number of consistencies and inconsistencies are identified and we speculate on the extent to which the current state of tactile map production is likely to meet the needs of the client population. We describe the sample on which the report is based, the output in terms of quantity of maps produced, choice of production method, types of environment mapped and intended uses of maps. We also focus on issues of map design, such as the choice of map size and format, and choice of symbols.
Mathematical algorithms for placing labels upon maps have been used for the past thirty years. This paper presents a multi-criteria model for point feature annotation that examines the sometimes conflicting issues in the point labelling process. Based on a maximum labelling model, the primary goal is to place the maximum number of labels on the map, although secondary goals reflect other considerations such as point size, position preferences, and feature importance. By differentially weighting these separate factors, emphasis could be placed on each consideration in turn allowing the cartographer to assess the implications of each factor in the point annotation process. An application of this model to mountain peaks in Grand Teton National Park illustrates how it can assist a cartographer as a preliminary step in assessing the difficulty encountered in labelling point symbols as well as providing the cartographer with a choice of alternative scenarios upon which to base the final placement.
Most European countries have a national topographic map series at 1:100000 scale, but currently Great Britain does not. The history of mapping at or around 1:100000 in Britain is described briefly and consideration given as to why such a scale would be appropriate for a national series of mapping aimed at tourist and leisure users. The main focus of the article is to review a series of 1:100000 scale maps of two sample areas of Great Britain, produced in the style of various western European medium scale topographic maps. Two further design examples are produced combining desirable characteristics of the maps examined. The results show both that many of the designs translate well to 1:100000 scale maps of the British landscape and that there is considerable potential for the topographic base as this scale providing a basis for a national series aimed at tourist and leisure users.
This paper examines the changes in the nature and purposes of Russian land and forest cadastres in the age of Peter The Great in order to illustrate the changes in Russian society and the priorities of state policy. The scientific basis of the Petrine cadastre had been borrowed from English mapmaking, but geography and cartography developed in a different social context. This resulted ill the emergence of a 'resource' paradigm in Russian geographical practice, associated with the reforms carried out by the central power. This demonstrates the decisive role Of the practical demands of the State for geography ann cartographic development in Russia. Science auld technology did not necessarily mean more freedom for Russians. The reforms allowed the state to control people more effectively. The emergence of the new cultural basis was merely the next step by which scientific and philosophical thought started to develop, enriched by ideas of the Renaissance and the Scientific Revolution.
Regardless of changing official definitions, many cartographers continue to think of cartography in terms of art and science. This paper critiques the use of the art/science dualism as a means of understanding cartography, particularly by those interested in reexamining the role of aesthetics, design, and visual expression in cartography. Two basic approaches to 'art' and 'science' in the context of cartography and information graphics are described along with their limitations. It is argued that the manner in which the art/science dualism has been used in cartography does not stand up under close scrutiny and that attempts to strictly differentiate art and science have ended in confusion while simultaneously demeaning both art and science. It is suggested that various and seemingly divergent trends including postmodern deconstruction, hypermedia, cognitive psychology, semiotics, geographical information systems, and visualization all point to a process oriented means of understanding cartography. Within this process, 'art' and 'science' serve a functionally similar role, informing the different ways in which we come to know and re-know our human and physical worlds.
Although methods of map preparation and production in the nineteenth century are generally understood, in truth little is known in detail. A rare opportunity to further understanding of the methods of the day is offered by the analysis of the surviving working documents and correspondence related to the production of town maps for Lysons' Magna Britannia. As methods of compilation and preparation become clearer, some of the resultant town maps appear more original and carefully created than previously thought, forcing a reassessment of their value as historical evidence.
Although widely known, the inset town plans which appeared on large-scale maps of Great Britain have never been systematically listed and analysed. Inset town plans are discussed in terms of their design and content, and the rare process of revision is illuminated. Particular attention is focussed on the sources of plans and patterns of occurrence and authorship are identified. From this detailed analysis, a picture of their strengths and weaknesses for the urban historian is developed.
A map has long been considered to be a legitimate communication medium, made by the cartographer for different map users. Valuable contributions to the scientific fundamentals of cartography should be expected from the critical investigation of communication aspects of the map, particularly map signs. This article first attempts to analyse the signs used in cartographic communication from the point of view of semiotics - especially semantics - then redefines the map, our communication tool, under its ascertained characteristics.
Product conformance is the process of testing a product against a published set of rules. The application of this to spatial data is to national standards for the transfer of spatial data, such as British Standard 7567, or NTF. Syntactic conformance studies the detailed content of the spatial data set. We have studied the syntactic conformance of various Ordnance Survey products with BS7567. Data model conformance deals with the logical relationships between different features in the transfer set, and whether these are portrayed according to the standard. We look at the Ordnance Survey's Boundary Line product. This is supplied in Level 3 of BS7567: an alternative approach allowing the product to be transferred at Level 4 is suggested.
The First World War generated an unprecedented requirement for up-to-date medium and large scale maps of operational areas, largely for artillery use. While on the Western Front this demand could, in part, be met by enlarging and revising existing topographic maps, away from the Western Front there were operational areas which were either previously unmapped or only covered by small scale maps which were not suitable for planning and controlling military operations. The required maps had to be produced quickly and were often of areas which were inaccessible on the ground. In these areas aerial photography came to play an important role in the map making process. This paper describes some of the work undertaken and discusses how the lessons learnt were not always readily applied in Britain after the War.
Increasing environmental awareness has highlighted the need to identify development sites which have been subject to contamination in the past. This growing consciousness is increasingly reflected in legislation and codes of practice which require the investigation of sites prior to development. The first and cheapest step in this investigative process is to trace site use over time through the 'desktop' survey of historic maps and other archive sources. This paper challenges accepted assessments of the usefulness of different types of historic maps and discusses their value and deficiencies in the identification of past site use.
This paper presents a new approach to line generalisation which uses the concept of 'effective area' for progressive simplification of a line by point elimination. Two coast-lines are used to compare the performance of this, with that of the widely used Douglas-Peucker, algorithm. The results from the area-based algorithm compare favourably with manual generalisation of the same lines. It is capable of achieving both imperceptible minimal simplifications and caricatural generalisations. By careful selection of cut-off values, it is possible to use the same algorithm for scale-dependent and scale-independent generalisations. More importantly, it offers scope for modelling cartographic lines as consisting of features within features so that their geometric manipulation may be modified by application- and/or user-defined rules and weights. The paper examines the merits and limitations of the algorithm and the opportunities it offers for further research and progress in the field of line generalisation.
Previous research has shown that people are less concerned with events that occur in distant places than with nearby happenings. World maps show the locations of and relative distances between places, but the cartographer's choice of map projection system and geographic origin for the projection can significantly affect the apparent distances between places on the map. The study reported here was designed to investigate the relationship between the emotional involvement of a sample student population with hypothetical events in a number of world locations and the distance between 'home' and those locations as shown on different map projections. Results showed a consistent inverse relationship between interest and distance, with the interest level for the same cities changing as distances (projections) were changed. Other variables also influenced people's responses. Overall, women expressed significantly higher emotional involvement with places than men, and certain regions produced a higher or lower level of response than would have been predicted by distance alone.
It has long been recognised that the earliest cartographic images of British towns enjoyed a long life through the re-use and adaptation of copper plates and through plagiarism. However, the precise nature of the complex relationship between various images has remained unclear and it is, therefore, necessary to try to unravel exactly which plates were adapted and re-used and who copied who and when.1
The article provides an overview of the huge cartographic holdings of The National Archives (TNA). It continues by outlining the procedures by which records are selected for permanent preservation by TNA.
Vegetation and rural land use show some of the greatest variety both in what and in how they are depicted on topographic maps. This paper discusses the various approaches that have been adopted to the selection of information to be shown on non-specialist maps. It also looks at the different ways in which vegetation and rural land use are depicted on a range of published map.
The development of water transport, particularly of dock provision, was a potent influence on the nature and structure of some British towns. The impact of this development has been recorded in the detailed mapping of water transport specifically and in the mapping of towns generally. The nature and extent of this mapping is analysed in order to assess the degree to which early maps can be used as sources for the history of urban water transport and its impact on the townscape.
A selection of children's picture atlases was analysed for pictorial content and illustrative style. Eighty six primary children were interviewed and an assessment made of their identification and interpretation of map-located pictures. Picture recognition and interpretation without reference to any explanatory legend or text were found to be highly variable. Some characteristics of picture misinterpretation are identified and a number of aspects of children's reasoning about picture location are explored. Some tentative guidelines are presented for cartographers and illustrators as well for teachers and parents.
Traditionally, choropleth maps are used to examine spatial patterns present in a data distribution rather than to examine specific data values within that distribution. The transformation of initial numeric data values into graphic values for visual display differs for classed and unclassed mops. Classed maps first group data into classification intervals and each interval is then assigned a graphic value usually using the principle of maximum contrast. Unclassed maps skip the classification step and directly assign graphic value based on the original numeric data value. The paper examines the differences in defining algebraic-to-graphic transformation lines for both classed and unclassed classed maps and especially the role of the maximum contrast principle in constructing classed choropleth maps. Results show that the maximum contrast principle increases the visual complexity of spatial patterns in a classed map over the level present in a corresponding unclassed map.
In the last few years the Internet has become almost a household name. Much of the current interest in the World Wide Web (WWW) has arisen through very effective advertising promotions by, for example, Compuserve and AOL (america On Line). The WWW is a vast, easily accessible global data and information resource, which includes a considerable amount of geographical information. With developments in HTML (Hypertext Markup Language), CGI (Common Gateway Interface) scripts, Javascript and Java the Internet offers even greater potential for education and training, interactive information retrieval, and even the display of animated files. This paper briefly explores the Internet in the context of maps and Cartography.
Public-Use Microdata Areas (PUMAs) are the smallest geographic units for which many U.S. Census variables are reported In particular 1990 microdata records for households and individuals can be aggregated only by PUMA, metropolitan area, state, and region. The Census Bureau distributes maps of these PUMAs only on paper however, and only for individual states. This note describes the construction of a national, digital base map of the PUMAs used in the 1990 U.S. Census microdata files (5% sample). The 1% sample of households has a separate set of PUMAs which do not correspond to those in the 5% sample.
Using examples from the governmental, commercial and educational sectors, the development of photo maps and mapping using satellite imagery is outlined. The emphasis of this paper is on the design possibilities and limitations which are evident in these products. Contrast and legibility problems and image clutter are considered, but it is concluded that the institutional impediments to the collaboration of specialists in researching and designing such maps may be of most importance in determining progress in the use of such maps.
The author reflects on some of the main influences on map design which occurred during his own working lifetime in cartography. These include the post-World War II developments in graphic arts technology and the impetus these gave to what is now regarded to 'traditional' cartography; the design challenge of the photomap; theory and research in the nineteen seventies and early nineteen eighties and finally the digital transition; The use of powerful digital systems to experiment with cartographic design, and the improvements in design standards which expert systems may offer to noncartographers are regarded as important prospects in the immediate future.
The long history of Chinese cartography nas been well documented. However, the contribution of geomantic maps to the Chinese cartographic tradition has been overlooked. It is suggested that topographic mapping skills employed in Chinese geomantic maps are probably the most elaborate form of presenting the relief of the land in the history of traditional Chinese cartography.
Existing methods of modelling and rendering relief from digitised contours adopt either regular grid or triangulated irregular network approaches. Both can have disadvantages which include imprecise terrain modelling, ineffective visualisation, and/or heavy computing overheads. An alternative approach has been developed which calculates profiles across the contour model, typically at about 1 mm separation at the visualisation scale, in the direction of an assumed illumination source. Intensity values are calculated for the profile swathes by considering profile gradient and local slope characteristics. The resulting shaded model gives an effective visualisation, and offers a number of benefits for additional processing because of computational economy and efficiency. Single light source images of shaded relief are often incomplete in their rendering because they favour relief trend lines in certain directions only. A technique has been developed to overlay generated shaded images from a range of illumination directions using a multiband approach, which has been found to enhance visualisation.
This paper provides a summary of the proceedings and discussion at a conference entitled 'The Future History of Our Landscape', held in October 1992. This meeting explored the issues connected with the changing nature of the Ordnance Survey supply of spatial data, in particular its effect on the Copyright Libraries and their users. Technical and organisational matters concerned with the supply and use of digital data in the archival environment are considered.
The fractal dimensions of 13 major rivers in south-east Australia were measured from the 1:100 000 scale maps and compared, giving values of between 1.06 and 1.2. The concept of fractal length is introduced, and for five rivers, measurements made on maps of three different scales showed this quantity to be relatively independent of map scale and fineness of measurement while the convention-ally defined river length showed considerable variation. The fractal dimension is also graphically related to the sinuosity index of a river.
This paper describes a methodology for generating a database of tactile symbols. It outlines the conception, development and refinement of the database into a framework suitable for access and searching by remote users. An example of how the database might work in regard to tactile line symbols is provided. A critical analysis of the database highlights the inherent challenges of constructing a framework for and subsequently managing data of this type in an electronic environment. We provide an overview of the potential benefits of using such a tool, and discuss how an evolving project of this kind might encourage a degree of standard practice in tactile map design.
The appearance of symbols for public rights of way on Ordnance Survey maps is taken for granted today. Their authority as public ways is derived from the Definitive Map of Public Rights of Way which was prepared consequent to the provisions set out in Part IV of the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949. The Definitive Map was mainly surveyed by volunteers from all walks of life working to non-compulsory guidelines. The resulting maps differed in accuracy of depiction and content. The inclusion in the national map specification of information of variable standards caused cartographic design problems and major changes in policy for Ordnance Survey. The background to rights of way mapping and its translation to the national map at the one-inch scale down to 1968 is examined here.
The standard model of the geometry of cartographic visualization in geographic information systems (GISs) is based on the classification of cartographic objects into points, lines, and polygons, represented with zero-, one-, and two-dimensional categories or may occupy an intermediate position between categories. A more complete, cognitive model of the geometry of visualization is proposed here. The new model is more flexible because it permits a symbol or object to be positioned anywhere within several continua between the standard dimensional categories.
Two experiments are reported both of which employed a research design originally used by Thorndyke and Stasz (1980) to elicit the spontaneous strategies of map readers, and to relate these to their skill in map reading. In Experiment 1, blind, visually impaired and sighted children explored a tactile or a print map while thinking aloud. The protocols obtained were analysed according to a set of strategy types. The children were also asked to produce a copy of the map to test their knowledge of it. These were rated according to accuracy. Experiment 2 used the same basic procedure with blind, visually impaired and sighted adults, who explored a more complex town map and plan of a building. Sighted participants produced more accurate copies of the map, and used strategies that focused on global spatial relations on the map, while blind and visually impaired participants tended to focus on individual localised elements of the map. However, those blind and visually impaired participants who produced more accurate copies of the maps, tended also to adopt a more global focus.
The Military Institution at Madras (1804-16) illustrates the centrality of surveying and mapping to late Enlightenment concepts of 'military science' and thus their centrality to the education of junior officers beyond the rudiments of military lore and drill. Pragmatically, the institution's field mapping exercises were used to provide basic topographic maps for south-east India (the Carnatic), the institution's students were also intended to serve after graduation on survey duty elsewhere in southern India. Intellectually, mapmaking was held to epitomise the 'scientific spirit' which military reformers desired to inculcate in the young ensigns: it combined mathematical and logical thought (theory) with concrete military results (practice). These last points underlie the conceptual issues of the early nineteenth-century militarisation of government cartography in Europe and the increasing 'map-mindedness' of military thinkers.
Although the term 'automation' has been used in connection with cartography for some time, the concept of totally automated map design and production is still a long way off Recent attempts at using computers to assist with map design have focused on the use of Expert Systems. A number of proposals have been made and several prototype systems produced, many of which are reported here. Where the objectives have been relatively narrow and sufficiently well focused, Cartographic Expert Systems have shown they have something to offer.
Geographical Information Systems are responsible for a tremendous increase in map production and map use over the last decades. This, and general technological advancement, created opportunities that challenged the cartographer to elaborate on cartographic representations that were tedious and laborious to make before. The three-dimensional map is an example of such a representation. This paper deals with design aspects of the three-dimensional map. Traditional cartographic textbooks acknowledge the existence of three-dimensional maps. However, they do not offer design tools for them, as they do for traditional two-dimensional maps. A discussion on the Why?, What? Where? of three-dimensional maps is followed by some design considerations. They involve three-dimensional perception, depth cues and possible presentation techniques. The paper finishes with some thoughts on the three-dimensional environment in which the maps should be produced and used.
Prior to the advent of professionalisation in geological mapping, the science was advanced by the accumulation of local information gained through the efforts of gifted amateur field-workers. Some of these men were to compile the first published cartographic portrayals of the geology of certain British districts. This article focuses attention on the role of one such man, David Milne, a singularly neglected figure in both cartographic and geological history. In addition to mapping geologically Scottish districts, Milne was also the central figure in the Highland and Agricultural Society's struggle to advance the Ordnance Survey's mapping of Scotland during the period 1837-1875.
Only a small proportion of the huge number of maps, plans, charts and architectural drawings held in The National Archives have previously been individually described in a way which enables the user to identify items of relevance to his or her research. This article outlines the current project to automate and integrate the existing multiple map finding-aids into the on-line catalogue. In the process of doing this it also explains The National Archives map extract references.
The paper discusses changes that have occurred over the last 15 years in how maps are sold, where they are sold and who is buying them. The emphasis is on the situation in the United States of America, but developments in Europe and the United Kingdom are also included.
The first BCS President of the twenty-first century reflects on the cartography of the twentieth century and identifies those 'maps' that he believes have had significant influence on the development of the discipline during that century.
Why should a specialist sport require a map of its own? Trout fishing is not dependent on map use, but a carefully researched and presented map is a useful addition to the angler's tackle bag. The sport does not require the absolute planimetric accuracy of, say, an orienteering map, but careful research and selection of features is just as important. What information is essential to the angler and what is helpful? What is background information; and what, if anything, should be left off?
Maps produced for road races and cross-country races vary hugely in nature and quality, but the average level of graphicacy is low. Maps for road races, such as marathons, are often generalized representations of the route, studied beforehand but rarely required during the race by competitors, and used by spectators as well as entrants. They are often produced by graphic designers. Maps for cross-country events are needed for way finding, but tend to be drawn by amateurs. Their content often does not reflect the needs of the competitors and they are unsatisfactory as maps. The authors contend that professional map-makers are in a position to influence the design of race maps by asking users what their requirements are and producing basic rules which amateur mappers can follow. A survey was conducted to determine the map requirements of cross-country racers and sample maps produced as a result. The sample maps have been well received by runners.
Cartographic information originating in 'map-space' has a central role in the communication of spatial information. Cartographic information used for visualizing geo-referenced data is always created at a certain scale, where a physiognomic simplification is carried out resulting in substantial reduction and abstraction. This takes place as part of an excessive modelling process which includes cartographic generalization and visualization. This process, caused by the complexity of steps in generalization, and supported in a cartographic information system cannot be carried out automatically INTERGRAPH's Map Generalizer(R) is an interactive tool for semi-automated cartographic generalization. In this experiment its functions are applied to the cartographic modelling of linear and areal map objects. Different algorithms were used and the best parameters for transferring hydrology, relief, and forest geometry form a scale of 1:50000 to 1:200000 were determined.
As has been already suggested, especially by Schlichtmann (1985) and Head (1984), the parallel between language and cartographic communication is possible only in the deep, concept dimension of both texts and maps. On the basis of this assumption an attempt to develop a systematical comparison between the mental-dimension of maps and texts has been undertaken. propositions as semantic structures of texts are compared to map objects. The notions of informational structure (given-new contract) of map-objects, and its dependency on the context are introduced. Finally, map and text structures are compared on the basis of the van Dijk's (1980) theory of macrostructures.
The CRT monitor is still the dominant type of screen display. The technology imposes design limits On displays, especially in size, resolution and colour. Relatively inexpensive computing power and user-friendly software have invaded the graphics maraket, including cartography. Screen map displays are used for interactive working, for final displays and for the design of printed maps. The article discusses the principal design requirements associated with each type of use and offers some suggestions to the designers of such displays, also incorporating the interesting new possibilities offered by the new technology.
This paper introduces two automated procedures that work in vector mode throughout. The first procedure traces waterlines, the decorative device with which copper engravers differentiated water areas in maps before the introduction of screen-printing. The second procedure resorts to waterlines to perform the Medial-Axis Transformation (MAT), a centrelining operation originally proposed by Pattern Recognition workers. Both procedures are described at a rather high level. Noted as important is the passing on of pointers from the input shapes to the Medial-Axis via the waterlines. Those pointers are characterised as fundamental to the straightforward definition of the Medial-Axis from waterlines. The analogy between a well-known raster and the vector waterlining and MAT are discussed and their relative merits compared. In this context, the thesis is advanced that that analogy is the reason for the universal applicability of the proposed vector method. Cartographic and Geographic Information Systems (GIS) applications, such as delimitation of the sea boundaries and the centrelining of streams and streets, are illustrated and outlined in brief manner. Even briefer are the references to, as yet undeveloped, applications in those same fields. To conclude, some thoughts are ventured on the use of MAT in relates disciplines, such as Pattern Recognition, Geology, and Mining.
A map is needed to move accurately and with confidence between widely separated points. This is true if widely separated means at such a remove that one requires a map. We can find our unaided throughout some neighbourhood of our homes, though its extent varies form person to person and, for one person, with time and conditions. For any person there are, moreover, a variety of partially overlapping neighborhoods, each associated with a particular from of travel. A neighbourhood, may be sketchy and primitive. In other cases neighbourhoods are extensive and known. Within a neighbourhood, orientation is an expression of one's familiarity with the surroundings. Beyond it, some additional device is needed. Such devices are referred to here as maps, or more specifically route maps. The definitions of neighbourhood and map are thus intimately connected. It is concluded that a map is needed whenever we leave our neighbourhood.
The Electronic Chart and the Electronic Chart Display Information System are integrating technologies requiring accurate position fixing using GPS, assessment of current sea surface situation using radar and high quality display in map form. The latter aspect is addressed here with an emphasis on operational requirements for such shipboard cartography including colour and symbolisation.
Softcopy and hardcopy maps are the main form of output from Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and Digital Image Processing Systems (DIPS). Graphic design toolboxes available with these systems provide virtually anyone with the freedom to make maps to be used either on-screen or as paper hardcopy. With many users possessing little cartographic background and knowledge, the resulting maps are, however, seldom carefully thought out cartographic products designed to communicate information effectively and efficiently. The problem at present is that there are few map design guidelines available to assist users in designing the cartographic output in an electronic medium. This paper seeks to re-emphasize the importance of cartographic design and, using the example of the visual variable colour to illustrate, focuses on some of the associated problems. In an age when map communication is of growing importance, the paper seeks to stress the need for cartographers to act now and rake this problem on board through the provision of education, training and guidance.
The author has put forward, in the past, a definition of cartography as means of paying homage to the particular fractal surface we inhabit; of fulfilling an obligation to one of our parents (the other being Father Time) by portraying in all her wonderful oddity this goddess of (roughly speaking) two and a half dimensions. Having read further contributions to the question he suggests another definition: Cartography is the cultivation by graphic means of the compass rose. 
Acquiring cartographic skills is an important part of any geography student's training and education. Whilst there are a number of good cartographic software packages now available, graphics design (art, paint, and CAD) software packages have generally been more widely available for micro-computers offering a potentially useful alternative especially to teach computer cartography. The relatively low cost of this software, facilitating installation on educational networks, their relative ease of use for students with limited computer background and drawing skills, and widespread availability offers a number of distinct advantages. The opportunity to explore map design from an experimental perspective also makes them very attractive for educational purposes. This paper examines the educational potential of graphics design software packages for teaching cartography.
This paper intends to discuss the nature or essence of digital map generalisation. Existing work is examined and new views are expressed. First of all, the motivation of generalisation is discussed. It is then grouped into two types, i.e. direct and indirect motivation and it is argued that scale is the only element in direct motivation. Based on this argument two fundamental processes in digital map generalisation are distinguished i.e. transformation of reality in scale dimension (digital data generalisation) and digital-to-graphic transformation (graphic presentation). Finally, a framework is devised for both of these two processes.
This short article addresses some of the problems in cartographic generalisation, especially the mis-use of data point reduction algorithms for generalisation purpose. Special attention is paid to line generalisation. Through analysis, the author emphasizes that 'data reduction' is applied when the scale change is not of concern, while generalisation is applied due to the change in scales. Therefore, data point reduction algorithms should not be used for generalisation purposes. Also different benchmarks such as the manually generalised versions of existing maps should be used for the purpose of evaluating line generalisation algorithms instead of always using the original feature.
Digital line simplification is a common cartographic operator for removing redundant detail from encoded lines due to scale changes or in-stream digitising procedures. In most discussions of line simplification algorithms, it is assumed that the parameters for the simplification, such as the bandwidth or the percentage reduction in objects, have already been determined and are constant. There is rarely any discussion of how parameters are set. In this case, one enters the line simplification problem at the second stage, dealing only with the issue of determining which segments to retain. Although simplification operators exist to eliminate detail as map scale changes, there is little connection between scale and the bandwidth parameter. As scale changes, there are no established guidelines for setting a bandwidth. However, Topfer and Pillewizer's radical law states that the number of objects to be retained in a scale change is proportional to the square root of the scale change. This paper presents a method for combining the quantitative measure of how much detail to retain with a qualtitative measure of which detail to retain in an attempt to produce a better objective method for implementing the subjective rules of manual compilation.
This article is an overview of the issues considered for a map digitization project. It is based on the authors' experience of building a website for early printed maps of Hampshire, which is still growing in scope and ideas. Most map websites, even those that are funded well, seem to have very limited objectives, and some surprising lack of rigour. We advocate an adventurous approach, constrained by clear and defined standards of working. We have considered why and how maps, and associated descriptive texts, can be presented, and how raw text and image data can be made available for further research.
Real 3D objects are typically explored with high efficiency by several fingers. The largest increase in efficiency is obtained between the use of one and two fingers. The aim of the present experiment was to investigate if the efficiency of identifying a country on a 2D tactile map can be increased by the use of two fingers exploration along opposite sides of the neap compared with following along the contour. The result was that there was no significant difference between one finger and two-finger exploration, but there were significant improvements over sessions. The difference between exploration of 2D and 3D objects is discussed.
The research reported here was designed for two reasons:firstly, to involve anyone with an interest in cartographic visualization to participate in eliciting cartographic knowledge and to provide them with the opportunity to contribute their practical knowledge and opinions: and secondly, to inform the design of algorithms for line generalisation. In the past, there has been some resistance to such mining and codification of expert knowledge. however, many cartographers now welcome highly interactive computer graphics, computer mapping and virtual reality systems as providing them with new opportunities for launching cartography into a new creative age. Despite nearly thirty years of research on line generalisation algorithms, the available algorithms are somewhat simplistic. This research, undertaken under the auspices of the BCS Design Group, explored the behavioural tendencies of cartographers engaged in line filtering. The results show that a carefully contrived, even if obviously artificial, exercises on the deconstruction of lines into meaningless forms can prompt cartographers to observe, record, and discuss their own cognitive processing.
The coming of the railways was the greatest instrument of change in the layout and nature of the British nineteenth-century town, nt least due to its unusual privilege of being able to acquire property by compulsory purchase. Once a railway proposal had been approved by Parliament, the railway company had a statutory power to purchase any land which lay on its chosen line, subject only to 'limits of deviation' defining the margins of development allowed. Thus, railway companies were in a uniquely privileged position to redraw the map of British townscapes. Although maps of British towns from the middle decades of the nineteenth century all portray railway facilities to a greater or lesser extent, many of them were specifically designed to emphasise the relationship between the development of the railway infrastructure and the town. Much can be learned about railway development and its impact on the townscape from the combined study of maps relating specifically to components of the town's railway infrastructure and of large-scale town maps which successively portray transport developments within the urban landscape.
This paper describes a procedure for the automatic generalisation of ''outlier polygons'' within a map. A project undertaken by the Institute of Terrestrial Ecology (ITE) for the European Commission (EC) has offered the opportunity to develop this procedure with the intention of adopting it for future generalisation of the ITE Land Cover map (LCMGB). This procedure is a component part of a wider development that uses both automated and semi-automated GIS techniques. This paper describes the raster-based procedure, its effects on patch patterns in a landscape and briefly, how the procedure is used within an overall mapgeneralisation process. The wider development is described in Brown and Fuller (1995 in press).
Much cognitive mapping data consists of spatial elements such as points, lines and polygons. This makes it possible to analyze such data with traditional spatial statistics and to visualise them using cartographic techniques. Using this approach can reveal 'hidden' spatial patterns and provide quantitative evidence which can be used in identifying, understanding and explaining cognitive mapping theories. This paper examines the role of computer cartography and spatial analysis in cognitive mapping research and the most appropriate approach to their implementation. The possible contribution of Geographical Information Systems (GISs) is investigated and the development and implementation of two stand-alone specialised packages CMAP and MiniGASP, are outlined.
Height information has always formed an integral part of Ordnance Survey's map information. From the days of depiction by hachuring on one inch maps to today's Digital Elevation Models the aim has always been to represent the terrain for strategic purposes. The combination of national terrain model coverage, increasing height resolution and the continuing improvement in computing power has the potential to open new areas and markets for digital map data. This will involve the integration of vector, raster and digital imagery, in a variety of complementary applications and outputs. The future for three dimensional elevation data looks promising. Before the end of the decade we might increasingly expect real-time interaction with 3-d mapping and models of some complexity.
From its inception in the middle of the ]9th century, the Royal Geographical Society (RGS) took a keen interest in the exploration and mapping of the Everest region. This formed an integral part of the many Everest expeditions, some of which had individual surveyors or survey parties attached to them. Many mountaineers took part in this work, particularly those with a scientific background. But it was not until 1961 that a comprehensive map was produced of the Everest region.
The organizational lineage of the UK Defence Geographic and Imagery Intelligence Agency can be traced back to the seventeenth century. For much of this time the organization, bearing a succession of different titles, formed only a very small section of the armed forces, and, until the World War of 1914-1918, its main duties were the creation and maintenance of a map collection and the acquisition of geographical data of foreign countries. The survey and mapping innovations made during the war greatly enlarged the remit of what was now termed the Geographical Section General Staff (M14). This paper outlines the work of M14 in the inter-war years taking account of the principal personalities involved, and traces the controversial background to the creation in 1943 of the Directorate of Military Survey - the immediate predecessor of the DGIA.
Geographic Information Systems in their present form owe much to a legacy from cartography. Cartography has provided both a pioneering application for the domain, as well as the established archive of paper maps which have been turned into data on the digitising table. The conceptual basis of the map, specifically the Boolean map, has also become fundamental to GIS. To better serve the many users, however, I argue here that GIS must move away from this model for data creation, storage and presentation, and as a result the relation between GIS and a cartography must change. Although cartography has undoubtedly provided an impetus to GIS initiatives, GIS must change to support real geographical information as it is recorded by domain scientists, and software tools need to be developed to transform that data into intelligible views and exploratory tools. This can be done with current GIS, but it must be made much easier. With this change the need for cartographic design skills among GIS users will increase rather than decrease. To ensure that geographic information will be intelligible to the investigator and the user 'good' design will be paramount, and is currently noticeable by its absence in system defaults available within GIS.
Because of lower cost and higher quality, softcopy output files provide a better solution than hardcopy for the reproduction of graphic images. Different file formats (VCGL, HPGL, EPSF, CGM) available with ARC/INFO GIS were examined. EPSF provided the best visual quality and is recommended for hardcopy reproduction. Sometimes, there may be loss of information and visual quality if conversion of graphic images from GIS needs conversion from various other formats. The availability of GIF and JFIF file format with GIS software can help to improve the visual quality of electronic atlases. GIF is recommended for better on-screen quality of graphic images.
For people suffering from Specific Learning Difficulties maps can be confusing and frightening documents. Even the colours used may present an alarming image which cannot be seen - let alone understood We have identified five such areas of ''Dys'' functions and linked them to colour preferencing. We can find no evidence that this common denominator has been previously investigated Modern mapping software packages offer the facility to create bespoke colour maps to meet such specific requirements. Our research into individual map content and design warrants further study. To date, we have produced a tailor-made made map, that works, for one such child.
With the intention of bringing to public notice details of Scotland's mineral resources, the Highland Society, in 1834, instituted a scheme of geological patronage. A wards of cash and medals were offered to authors of meritorious geological surveys of Scottish coal-districts and Counties. This paper traces the history of the County premium-competition and focuses attention on the little-known prize-winners.
This paper describes, from a map librarian's perspective, an investigation into the feasibility of the provision of digital mapping for use by students in a British academic library. Establishing the funding has been a significant part of the project. This has included consideration of hardware as well as the pricing structures for the supply of digital cartographic data.
Most projects which involve planning of rural areas and towns in developing countries require maps, but many of these countries do not have sufficient large-scale mapping suitable for this purpose, or maps which are up-to-date. With environmental-friendly projects becoming highly desirable, up-to-date and accurate maps are vital As most large scale mapping projects require technical assistance, this paper discusses aid agreements with donor countries. These opportunities could be of benefit to private entrepreneurs. This paper also examines the project management approach for introducing mapping projects to developing countries. It makes special reference to a large mapping project in Zimbabwe in which the author was personally involved.
Piaget's theories suggest that children up to the age of approximately 12 learn most effectively via concrete teaching methods. Subsequently abstract approaches can be used. An experiment was devised to test whether concrete learning techniques were superior to abstract techniques in teaching contour reading to pupils aged 12-13. Experimental groups were taught via relief models and control groups via an abstract text book orientated approach. The results showed that both methods were equally effective. Pupils expressed a preference towards the concrete approach.
The standard of Antarctic maps in many of the world atlases on sale in the UK is reviewed and the criteria by which they were assessed are discussed. A description of some of the recent changes to the coastline of this dynamic continent emphasises the need for thorough research before reproducing maps of Antarctica in such educational publications.
Choosing effective colour schemes for thematic maps is surprisingly difficult. ColorBrewer is an online tool designed to take some of the guesswork out of this process by helping users select appropriate colour schemes for their specific mapping needs by considering: the number of data classes; the nature of their data (matched with sequential, diverging and qualitative schemes),- and the end-use environment for the map (e.g., CRT, LCD, printed, projected, photocopied). Color Brewer contains 'learn more' tutorials to help guide users, prompts them to test-drive colour schemes as both map and legend, and provides output in five colour specification systems.
This paper describes the design and development of two trail 1:100000 scale Ordnance Survey maps targeted specifically at the inexperienced and reluctant map users in the touring and holiday market. These are two maps which depart from the very high map specifications designs normally offered by Ordnance Survey. The use of extensive consumer market research and the objective analysis of existing touring type maps on sale have enabled Ordnance Survey to publish two experimental maps, which will succeed or fail by consumer reaction alone.
In the context of spatial data handling, the cartographic visualization process is considered to the translation or conversion of spatial data from a database into graphics. The cartographic visualization process is changing: changing from being supply-driven to demand-driven. More people will be involved in making maps. More maps will be created, many of them only for a single purpose. These maps are changing from being final products presenting spatial information to interim products that facilitate our visual thinking. These changes require a different type pf cartographer, someone who is an integral part in the process of spatial data handling. As well as traditional cartographic design skills, cartographers must make their knowledge available to fellow geoscientists using interactive real-time maps to solve their problems. A challenge for cartographers is to create or improve mapping tools that allow exploration.
Maps differentiating countries by colour are commonly used in atlases and elsewhere. A condition of such maps is that each zone should have a different colour from each of its neighbours. It has been proved that a minimum of four colours is necessary for this, although applying these colours to a set of zones is likely to be a process of trial and error until a satisfactory solution is found. The problem is analysed and the procedure for finding a solution is described. In order to automate the task the solution is implemented using PROLOG, a declarative language well suited to this type of problem.
Generalization is a complex task which requires a good understanding of the geometrical and semantic aspects of map features as well as the potential use of the map. Reasoning about spatial relationship, comparing alternative solutions, and contextual thinking are all important activities required for generalization decision-making. Such activities are not easy to simulate in a computer without sufficient information and the support of good data structures and adequate reasoning mechanisms. This paper introduces a dynamic decision tree structure in an attempt to partly circumvent the problem of urban road network generalization through the use of object classification and aggregation hierarchies, topological data structure, decision rules, and AI technology. Apart from the construction process, it also discusses the reasoning process for decision-making, and provides two test results with some discussion on the benefits and short-comings of the proposed approach.
Though The Netherlands were mapped at large scales before 1800, the resulting maps never covered the whole country. Large-scale mapping really started after the beginning of the 19th century. The maps were meant for military use, though civilians have always admired them. Since 1970 all large-scale topographic mapping published since 1800 has been made available to the general public in facsimiles or as atlases which are sold in their hundreds of thousands in The Netherlands. Is this because The Netherlands is a densely populated country, because there is a cultural-historical tradition or because of the use of the right marketing techniques? With these atlases, map departments can easily fulfil their needs for basic topographic information, old and new. But the biggest advantages are the availability of toponymic indexes and the ability to compare topographic data chronologically.
During the nineties important challenges to cartography will be related to mapping spatial data's multi-dimensional and temporal component. From a cartographic point of view it is necessary to look at the implications of the use of animated maps. The paper concentrates on communicative aspects of the spatio-temporal map. In order to obtain some concrete evidence of the response of users to spatio-temporal map displays a map user test was carried out. Animated maps and the respective static ones depicting the same subjects were presented to the users and questions were asked. The results indicate that although the correctness of answers is not influenced by the type of map (i.e. static or animated), the users perceive faster from animated map displays.
NetCDF (Network Common Data Form) is a data sharing protocol and library that is commonly used in large-scale atmospheric and environmental data archiving and modeling. The NetCDF tool described here, named NCWin and coded with Borland C+ + Builder, was built as a standard executable as well as a COM (component object model) for the Microsoft Windows environment. COM is a powerful technology that enhances the reuse of applications (as components). Environmental model developers from different modeling environments, such as Python, JAVA, VISUAL FORTRAN, VISUAL BASIC, VISUAL C+ +, and DELPHI, can reuse NCWin in their models to read, write and visualize NetCDF data. Some Windows applications, such as ArcGIS and Microsoft PowerPoint, can also call NCWin within the application. NCWin has three major components: 1) The data conversion part is designed to convert binary raw data to and from NetCDF data. It can process six data types (unsigned char, signed char, short, int, float, double) and three spatial data formats (BIP, BIL, BSQ); 2) The visualization part is designed for displaying grid map series (playing forward or backward) with simple map legend, and displaying temporal trend curves for data on individual map pixels; and 3) The modeling interface is designed for environmental model development by which a set of integrated NetCDF functions is provided for processing NetCDF data. To demonstrate that the NCWin can easily extend the functions of some current GIS software and the Office applications, examples of calling NCWin within ArcGIS and MS PowerPoint for showing NetCDF map animations are given.
During the Second World War, the German army developed the largest organization of any nation ever to contribute military applications of earth science in war time. In the summer of 1940, its military geologists assisted planning for potentially the greatest amphibious assault to that time in history by preparing maps which analysed the terrain of southeast England in terms of coastal geomorphology, groundwater supply, quarry sites for construction materials and off-road trafficability. These specialist maps were generated at scales of 1:50 000, 1:100 000 or 1:250 000 by annotating topographical base maps, derived from the then current Ordnance Survey maps at most similar scale, with data derived from maps and memoirs published by the Geological Survey of Great Britain or larger-scale Ordnance Survey maps. They represent an early example of geotechnical mapping skills developed more fully in the German armed forces for operations elsewhere later in the war.
The 1990s have witnessed the publication of a plethora of maps in the British news media on the subject of the 'new Europe'. These graphic representations are part of a broad debate concerning the Emerging post-Cold War European political landscape. This paper explores these maps and their role in the propagation of new European identities and xeoploitical discourse. The study reveals a subtle change from triumphalist Western representations of the European political landscape, especially the eastward expansion of Western ideal and institutions as a route to regional security, during the early 1990s, to a re-trenchment into 'realist' images, more redolent of the Cold-War period, in recent years. The study is itself the product of recent development in cartographic research which seek to uncover and understand the socio-political impact of the medium.
Since the emergence of newly independent states from the former Soviet Union, there has been a much more liberal approach to the publication of maps. Types and scales of maps which had formerly only been available to the military or planners are now being freely sold to the general public and to foreigners. Freed from the straitjacket of military requirements and censorship, a number of the former Soviet republics are also producing a much wider range of map types. This paper explores both the types of maps produced in the former Soviet republics and those being produced under the new, sometimes more liberal regimes.
The geography of Claudius Ptolemaeus has existed for some eighteen hundred and fifty years, but, because it has been passed down to us through the centuries in various forms, we are rather unsure of its original composition. There is little doubt of Ptolemy's contribution to early geographic/cartographic practice or that his Geographia was remarkably reliable in recording most of the first century AD Roman world. However, our confidence in its interpretation to date could be greatly improved. So far; there has been no satisfactory explanation of the 'turning' of Scotland and the majority of Ptolemy's poleis (named places) in Scotland have remained unidentified. In arriving with some confidence at what I regard as an acceptable technical resolution of this problem (Strang, 1994), other conclusions followed. The empirical approach adopted appears to be a satisfactory method for interpreting Ptolemy's early cartographic practices despite later corruption or some data.
Over 1,000 children aged 6 to 18 were asked to draw a free recall sketch map of the British Isles. The resulting maps were assessed according to their representation of shape and the relative location of political units. Eight types of map were identified, showing a marked association with children's age. Boys drew more detailed and accurate maps than girls. The development of children's ability to represent small scale space is discussed and some implications are identified for cartographers and teachers as well as some directions for future research.
The detection of critical points is an important issue in many disciplines such as computer vision, image processing, pattern recognition, computer graphics and cartography/GIS. Numerous algorithms have been developed since the late 1960s. These algorithms can be classified into three major groups, i.e. corner detection, polygonal approximation, and a hybrid technique which is a combination for the first two. This paper aims to provide a review, and to examine the advantages and disadvantages, of these various algorithms in all of these three categories.
Although feasibility is a subjective word, especially when if comes to project management, this paper provides some guidelines on how to go about a feasibility study, what factors to look at in both small and international mapping projects, and what procedure to follow. The author looks at the subject from the viewpoint of the mapping contractor who may be considering undertaking a project in a developing country. Most of the factors which influence mapping projects are particularly pertinent to developing countries, but many factors could apply equally to any large mapping project.
There are positive qualities inherent in maps, qualities beyond the function of informing and explaining, which in certain hospital contexts are palliative. Donald Addison, Senior Research Fellow at the Centre for Research in Art and Design, is currently engaged on research with an aim to provide proper evidence as to the influence of the visual arts on the quality of life of patients and staff in hospitals and hospices.
This paper presents an approach to visualising the area of the catchment for a service facility within a network which allows recognition of variability in travel time along the different road segments. By way of illustration fifteen different road conditions are modelled, for the 10 minute travel zone from the Leicester Royal Infirmary. The catchments at each state are then summed, and the resulting composite catchment is visualized as grey scale images, with zones of equal travel time appearing in similar greys. The observed pattern is of a core-periphery catchment, the core having high probabilities of being within a certain travel time, and the periphery having increasingly low probabilities. Four factors which may influence the size and shape of the zones are described. Finally, discussion centres on the shortcomings of both raster and vector data structures for completing the proposed procedure.
In this paper, the coordinates (latitude and longitude) of places in regions of central Macedonia (Pieria and Emathia) contained in Claudius Ptolemy's Geographiki Yphegesis were used to investigate the location of historical sites mentioned in Ptolemy's text. Initial research was carried out in order to find which of the sites mentioned by Ptolemy have an identified position today. A computation of the coordinates of the same sites was then made using a modern cartographic system. Finally, these two sets of coordinates (Ptolemy's and the modern ones) were compared and a mathematical model was developed to transform Ptolemy's cartographic data to the present-day coordinates. In this way, the combination of the mathematical elaboration of the available data together with research on historical geography may lead to useful data in removing the uncertainty of Ptolemy's coordinates in the regions under investigation.
In the world of the physical sciences geographers often develop specialized software packages for their scientific work that are directly applicable to their own domain and related domains of research. Philcarto and Philexplo for the Apple Power Macintosh are two such examples of this kind of software package. They are designed specifically to map spatially aggregated data for censuses (population and flats, agriculture, etc.) or specialized surveys (education, health, etc.) in which the 'national space' is divided up into spatial units (regions, departments, municipalities, etc.). Philcarto is an 'interactive cartomatic' program. Using two or three mouses clicks the user redefines the characteristics of the map which he wishes to obtain (the mode of representation, type of 'discretization', colours scales, symbols sizes, final annotations of the map, etc.). The value of this software does not lie with its methodological novelty, but with the ease of its use and the immediacy of displaying a map often comprising several thousand spatial units. Philexplo, by contrast, is a more innovative 'exploratory cartographic' program, the origins of which are based upon difficulties experienced in analyzing spatially aggregated data using 'traditional' statistical methods. The program uses linked windows to display various plots of the data, including a map window. Using various tools, all the displays can be dynamically explored: the plots can be transformed according to various actions of the user (selection of spatial units, 'colourization', etc.) and these transformations are displayed in all the other windows, in all the other plots.
The coastline is one of the most important boundary lines many maps. How the coastline is portrayed and the treatment of the zone adjacent to the coast varies considerably from map to map. The nature of this coastal environment is discussed and its representation on non specialist maps is illustrated with examples from a wide range of published topographic maps.
It was a rare privilege have been invited to deliver the inaugural Helen Wallis Memorial Lecture. I first met Helen in January 1971 when, as a postgraduate student, I gave a paper to the annual conference of what was then the Institute of British Geographers. It was in the early days of the application of computers to analyse large historical data sets and I was speaking about how this technology could help obtain information on land ownership from the parish tithe Re-reading that paper reminded me of what Helen said to me at the end of my talk: ''Don't forget that these tithe surveys were based on maps. Why don't you get your computer to tell us more about the maps? 'So, for the subject of my Helen Wallis Memorial Lecture I return to the tithe surveys of mid-nineteenth century England and Wales, not only because it was through these maps that I met Helen, but also because East year Richard Oliver and I published another monograph on tithe maps. Our Tithe Maps of England and Wales is the nearest book that I have written to what Helen suggested all those years ago.(1) It is an analysis of the cartographic characteristics of the surveys and a cartobibliography of the maps. Maps are there, first and last.
This article provides a brief outline of the variety of information that can be found via the Map Curators' Toolbox, an online resource created by the Map Curators' Group of the British Cartographic Society.
The cataloguing C. O. D. E. given is intended as an aide-memoire for any librarian or curator faced with cataloguing maps. It raises questions which should be considered when cataloguing maps, including the most basic: why catalogue?, what is cataloguing?, and what should the catalogue record include? Suggestions for answers are given in discussions about the nature of cartographic materials, cartographic intellectual ownership, titles, and physical and mathematical descriptions. The needs of the reader are considered in the degree of detail required to make a useful catalogue record.
This article aims to help researchers know where to go to find historical military, mapping and to explain what is being done to preserve military mapping and make it available to researchers.
This paper presents a new model for handling positional uncertainty in the process of line simplification. It considers that positional uncertainty in a simplified line is caused by (a) positional uncertainty in an initial line propagated through the process and (b) a deviation of the simplified line from the initial line. In order to describe the uncertainty in the simplified line, the maximum distance is defined as a measure. This measure is further adopted to determine parameters to a line simplification algorithm. Therefore, this model makes a step forward in the implementation of an uncertainty indicator for the line simplification. As compared existing models, the proposed uncertainty model in this paper is more comprehensive in uncertainty assessment for line simplification.
Fighting the 1914-18 war largely on enemy territory in both the east and the west, Germany was at a disadvantage compared to the Allies when it came to survey and mapping as it did not have access to much of the geodetic, topographic and cartographic data, relating to this terrain, necessary for modern warfare - in particular for artillery survey. Germany and Austria did, however, have a commanding lead in terrestrial and aerial photogrammetry, and the latter was to prove crucial in the production of accurate large-scale maps of enemy and occupied territory Despite strong forces of conservatism in the high and field commands and in the artillery and military survey organizations, new air survey methods based on the photogoniometer and radial triangulation were rapidly developed. Through continual laboratory and field experimentation and testing. Germany was to increase her lead in aerial photogrammetry, and by the end of the war had not only set up a completely new air survey organization but was developing a new generation of optical mechanical stereoplotting instruments of great precision. German progress was not, however, evident in all fields of military survey, and this paper examines the approaches taken by Germany to survey and mapping on the Western Front and briefly compares and contrasts them with those of the Allies.
Neither scholars nor collectors have ever had much time for the Ordnance Survey's one inch/mile, black outline, coloured roads district map; an ugly duckling, always overshadowed by its contemporaries. In fact, it was a remarkable map; not in itself, but in its place in history. It was the Survey's first systematic departure from standard, sectional series; its first series of any sort to be devised with civilian rather than military needs in mind; and of all Ordance Survey's unified series, the longest-lived and most prolific to date. This is the first in-depth study to be published of an unjustly neglected map.
The selection of routes from road maps is a complex perceptual process. How much do factors controllable by the map designer influence people's route choices, and in what ways can they be used to encourage optimal decisions?
Building on past research into the efficacy of symbols on tactile maps an attempt is made to synthesise the findings of investigations into tactile mapping. Conclusions regarding the most readable symbols, point, line and area, are given.
There is hidden within early texts information, which if analysed, can be used to increase our understanding of early cartography. This paper considers the possible relevance of the Venerable Bede's concept of Britannia to cartography, his comprehensive of the original data, and, why that may have affected his view of Britannia. The information also provides as with an opportunity to construct an alternative for the lost portion of the Tabula Peutingeriana, at least as it pertains to Britain, and to consider the residual areas.
Land Cover Map 2000 (LCM2000) is a thematic classification of satellite image data covering the entire United Kingdom. The map updates and substantially upgrades the Land Cover Map of Great Britain (LCMGB), made in 1990-92. This paper outlines the character of the map through a description of its specification, production and outputs. The paper is aimed at users of LCM2000 and derived data who need to understand more of the map and its characteristics. The paper also outlines plants for making data available to researchers and applied users. The most important development in LCM2000 was the spectral segmentation of images to generate vector land parcels. Land cover was then identified by the spectral classification of the image data in these parcels. Classification used specially developed procedures which exploited known spatial, spectral and contextual characteristics of land cover. The resultant GIS incorporates, within its vector structure, detailed attribute data which record parcel-based land cover, plus information on class probabilities, data on within-parcel heterogeneity, information on landscape structure and context, cover information from LCMGB, together with a record of each parcel's processing history.
Operation Overlord, with Neptune, its naval counterpart, was the largest amphibious assault in history. On 6 June 1944 after years of planning and benefiting from the topographical preparations for, and experience of, the landings in North Africa, Sicily and Italy, over 150 000 men landed from more than 4000 ships along 80 km of Normandy coastline. Careful examination of existing maps revealed that because of its relatively flat terrain and lack of obvious physical obstacles, the area was the most suitable for an Allied invasion. Vast quantities of new maps - many drawn up from existing maps, postcards and photographs, and updated using aerial photos and intelligence form various sources - had to be prepared. Montgomery subsequently commended the D-Day survey effort, stating that map supply never failed or prejudiced operations. In turn, the planing and experience of the Normandy landings informed the preparations for operation Anvil, the landings in the South of France on 15 August 1944. This paper examines the development of Allied mapping and geographic support programmes during the two-year period of preparations for D-Day, and during the landings, establishment of the bridgehead and breakout.
John Keates is very well known for his numerous scholarly contributions to cartography as an academic discipline and science. However, throughout his career, he was also very actively involved in the design and production of maps. in geology, glaciology and vegetation studies. However, during the 1970s, he was much involved in the design and production of a considerable number of maps for recreation purposes, including maps for orienteering. Many of these maps were regarded at the time as being extremely innovative in terms of their cartographic design and layout. The article outlines the development of what became known as the 'Glasgow' style of map design during John Keates' involvement with recreation maps in the 1970s.
Manual airbrushed hill shading has often been viewed as a rather crude and ineffective way of portraying relief relying to a large extent on the ability of the cartographer to visualize the landscape whilst having the dexterity to handle a seemingly uncontrollable spraying machine. This paper discusses the benefits and disadvantages of the manual process, the impact digital technology has had on it, and briefly reviews tools and equipment used in relief map production.
Since the publication of the first waterway map in 1990, the Inland Waterways of Britain series has expanded to a total of twenty three individual maps, a national route planning map, the first ring atlas and a directory of the inland waterways which explores aspects of preservation, restoration and heritage. Many of the titles have featured in walking guides, directories, promotional literature and web sites. This paper outlines the development of the series from the first map, describing the maps themselves, tracking the evolution of production methodologies, defining marketing and sales strategies and discussing the decision-making processes behind the publication and introduction of new titles.
Among the many cities depicted in the Civitates Orbis Terrarum by George Braun and Franz Hogenberg (Cologne, Vol. I-VI, 1572-1617), the city of Jerusalem was given a special status having been depicted in three different maps, each of them located in a different volume. None of these maps was drawn originally by Braun and Hogenberg, but all three of them were copies of maps printed earlier by other mapmakers. This paper describes these three different maps of Jerusalem, draws the distinction between realistic and imaginary information presented in them, and traces their sources through textual and graphic evidence.
In this paper a new approach for generalization of contours is described. The aim of this approach is to obtain both simplified and smoothed contours lying on a minimum number of characteristic points and inside the error bands. Characteristic points of contours are defined in relation to the skeleton lines of the terrain and determined using the deviation angles at the contour points. Error bands for contours are constructed by means of the steepest slope lines and the mean square planimetric errors at the contour points. The new approach is compared to the Li-Openshaw algorithm according to the experimental testing results.
As the pace of change increases and new technologies emerge faster than we can assimilate them, we can be forgiven for occasionally feeling left breathless, with new technologies, new skills and new approaches required at regular intervals. In the geographic information industry new ways of collecting data, new data providers and new users entering the industry, different ways of publishing maps and information, greater flexibility and ways of reaching all kinds of new users are all examples where the boundaries have been pushed back more in the last 10 years than in the previous 100. Changes in the mainstream underlying computing technology have enabled and facilitated this so much so more than radical new methods from within the industry. The impact of change on mapping and geographic information is as great as much as any other industry or the change we witness in our own lives from day to day. However, when we stand back and consider what our overall goals are, better management of resources, better education, health and quality of life, greater care in the use of the environment etc.-these are much the same as they always have been. The difference today is that the technology now allows us to really start to address the key issues we have before us. How then do we bring coherence to an apparently disconnected world? How do we prevent diffusion and potential chaos, especially when information integration is a critical success factor? How do we organize ourselves to do that? The paper will describe the concept of the Digital National Framework and how this is now developing to support such an infrastructure and how new technologies e.g. GML are facilitating its development. The paper proposes that we have to start by simplifying the GI infrastructure and recognize the building blocks in developing that infrastructure. We need to incorporate methods that unite and integrate definitive information. This in turn can be used to underpin all kinds of information in a joined-up way. Thereon it will support data sharing, decision making and problem-solving faster and more cost effectively than ever before.
Chloropleth maps have traditionally displayed standardized interval or metric data for areal units. The data classifications for such maps are usually on an attribute's statistical distribution without regard for its spatial distribution. This paper presents a classification scheme that focuses on an attribute's spatial arrangement without regard to its statistical distribution. Using only its ordinary property, data are classified to produce maps thats retain as much of the spatial structure of the raw data as possible. Such a classification retains as much visual complexity as possible for a given number of class intervals unlike the traditional quantile classification, the only other classification based solely on ordinal relationships.
High resolution colour mapping using modern technology has allowed us to explore the breadth of census data available to the contemporary social scientist. An examination of methods used to create cartograms, which minimise visual bias involves considering how densities and area boundaries should be mapped. The Modifiable Area Unit Problem is discussed and the advantages of using three-colour or trivariate mapping are outlined. Further modifications to traditional census mapping such as the mapping of change and flow are addressed.
The author offers advice on the storage needs of sheet maps, folded maps, oversized volumes, wall maps, globes, relief models in library and archive settings.
Examples of Spanish map-making are both known and admired throughout the world. The various map types penned during the Middle Ages occupy a prominent position in the history of cartography. Interest in Spanish cartography: has grown, albeit slowly. A range of historical circumstances e.g. wars have conspired to ensure that the cartographic records available today are however relatively meagre. Despite this, increased efforts have recently: been discerned for the promotion of cartographic patrimony, as well as for a greater sensitivity towards its study to identify its importance diffusion. This paper seeks to outline the main traits in the history of Spanish cartography by revealing the culture inspired it, the maps, map makers and circumstances in which they worked.
Cartography has had a long tradition of symbolisation, but until Bertin introduced systematic guidelines for symbolisation in the 1960s, the rules followed by cartographers were largely based on convention and experience. In recent years, as computerised mapping systems have become widely available and easily accessed by a large community of users who are cartographically untrained, poorly designed maps have been noticed everywhere, in magazines, in newspapers, even in scientific literature. This is because the current software opens all the possibilities for symbol selection to the user. In order to diminish the potential for misuse, expert systems should be developed, systems that encapsulate the expertise which provides guidance and control during symbol design and so ensure a good product.
This paper is an attempt to provide a view point for the formalisation of knowledge in cartographic representation What is supposed to be reality in the world is dependent on time and scale. So, there are different levels of reality, from low to high. Cartographic representation is a graphical record of reality at a particular location in the time-scale system. The problem of the transformation of reality in both scale and time dimensions in this time-scale system is also briefly discussed.
No statement appears to have been made at the time of why the national survey was put in hand in 1791. How far the Ordnance launched it in furtherance of its own responsibilities for the defence of the realm, and was therefore right to confer on the ordnance survey the prestige of its name, is a question which this article considers. The Board of Ordnance was a department of state which was already by then two and a half centuries old. Furnishing the ordnance survey with scientific and administrative skills and Ordnance also lumbered it with the political difficulties which led to its own demise.
Some, but not all, branches of the tourist industry make heavy use of maps. The industry has discovered the marketing potential of the Internet but in many cases has not yet fully exploited the extra potential of web maps compared to the traditional paper maps. Web maps can convey up-to-date tourist information very well but they have to be carefully designed to take account of the limitations of the medium. The be most effective, web maps should be basically simple and convey sufficient information interactively, on request. The map and symbol design should convey intuitively where and how this interaction can take place. This paper summarizes the typical faults found in tourist web map design and provides suggestions on good design practice.
The maintenance and updating of geo-databases has today become an urgent problem in national mapping agencies. In this paper, the problem is approached by introducing a model for a multiple representation database (MRDB) system. The term 'multiple representation' refers to a database structure in which several representations at various scales of the same geographic object are included. This structure offers several advantages, one of which is that an MRDB satisfies the varying multi-purpose needs of geographic data in a flexible manner and offers a means for solving updating problems. The system can be supported by an object-oriented approach. However, the most central requirement for the system is that bidirectional connectivities are supported among the various representations. This requirement has been examined in a case study that ws implemented in an object-oriented GIS environments. The differences between an MRDB system and a traditional map-product database system are illustrated and discussed.
This paper states the fundamental principles of the Statistical Models for Mobile Population (SMMP), and on the basis of the min features of various mobile places, designs statistical parameters and establishes corresponding mathematical models, so as to convert the dynamic population into the static population which is fit for drafting city population maps.
Since the breakup of the former Eastern Bloc and the emergence of newly independent states from the former Soviet Union, there has been a more liberal approach to the publication of maps. Types and scales of maps which had formerly been available only to the military or planners are now being sold freely to the general public and to foreigners. Freed from the straitjacket of military requirements and censorship, a number of the former Eastern Block countries are also producing a much wider range of map types. This paper explores both the types of maps formerly produced in the satellite countries of Eastern Europe and those being produced under the new, more liberal regimes.
This paper describes the design of a tactile map to enable a child with visual impairment to develop map reading skills, and to explore and appreciate a small area of countryside. A prototype map was developed adn following user feedback the design was re-evaluated and a complete tactile mapping package to aid environmental education was produced.
A survey was conducted to solicit user input into thematic content and design parameters when setting out to edit a new provincial atlas. Special interest groups and the general public were questioned about their behaviour and opinions regarding four aspects of atlases; general atlas use, general opinion on atlas content and design, suggestions for topics for an atlas of the province of British Columbia, and knowledge and interest in non-traditional methods of atlas presentation. This article discusses the issue of soliciting user input in atlas design and content, introduces the survey conducted, and reports on respondents' general atlas use and their opinions concerning content and design.
A solution to the automated generalisation of one particular class of geographical objects is proposed. Those objects are area patches distributed over a two-dimensional space. They are assumed to be semantically identical; hence the competition for space occurs on the basis of geometric considerations only. The solution proposed is algorithmic, stepwise and works for vector data only. The steps include data preprocessing, area expansion and contraction, elimination, reselection, aggregation, displacement, integrity check, smoothing and reduction. Among the generalisation rules which were applied are: (1) emphasis on larger patches at the expense of smaller ones, (2) preservation of the overall figure/group relationship, (3) Partial topological integrity, and (4) differential displacement according to patch area. Results are discussed within the wider framework of topographic map generalisation where diversified objects must be simultaneously generalised.
The imposition of a substantial cost recovery regime in 1986 forced the New Zealand Department of Survey and Land Information to review all its products and services, and the charges made for them. Successive price increases on three map series are described, and their effects on usage and revenue illustrated. Public perceptions of the value of each series are indicated by demand curves that differ in character for each series.
The work discussed in this paper aims to develop a Geographic Information System (GIS) to hold and display environmental and archeological data for the analysis of an inter-tidal zone. Langstone Harbour on the south coast of Hampshire, England, forms the study area. The work is being carried out with the support of The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB) and Hampshire County Council. As it was found that existing topographic mapping would not provide a suitable topographic base for such an inter-tidal area, metric aerial photography and analytical photogrammetry were employed to create a detailed topographic base. The photogrammetric models were fitted within a control network established using a high precision differential Global Positioning System (GPS). Recorded three dimensional coordinates of archaeological finds and structures will allow the comparison between environmental and locational contexts of coastal archaeological structures. This will greatly enlarge the available archaeological data set, adding value to the data, as well as assisting the study of sea level change and wider coastal processes. Conversion and integration of other environmental data is adding further data layers of the GIS.
The spatially discontinuous choropleth map is a poor representation of the underlying continuous distribution of population density. A possible alternative is to derive dasymetric maps at a fine spatial resolution by making use of satellite imagery in a geographical information system. However, there are cartographic problems when these maps are displayed and further processing is needed in order to obtain approximations to a continuous density surface. Isarithmic maps of these density surfaces retain a high degree of spatial accuracy while providing pleasing and highly adaptable presentations. The methods used to generate dasymetric and isarithmic maps are readily implemented in most raster based geographical information systems. For example, the classification of remotely sensed imagery, the subsequent processing and integration of data, and most of the cartographic display, were all undertaken in this work using the low cost IDRISI GIS that operates on standard IBM PC compatible hardware..
The alphabet is the best tool that humankind has for storing thoughts, ideas and instructions until they can be employed, acted upon or communicated to others. This paper presents a necessarily brief and selective summary of the development of the alphabet in Europe from preChristian days to the digital/laser technology in use today.
Terrain data obtained from satellite imagery or by scanning existing contour maps is in raster mode. Such data may be compressed by detecting and storing the critical points of contour lines. When hand digitising a contour map, a trained digitiser operator would usually select points which visually appear to be critical points. Existing interpolation techniques often fail to restore the critical points, including turning points, to their original positions. This article illustrates the use of splines composed of quadratic Bezier curves with monotone curvature for rendering contour lines which are represented only by their turning and end points, such that the positions of the turning points are preserved.
Although studies concerned with the communication of information and of power-relations have been central to the development of cartographic theory as hermeneutics they do not seem to have fully explored the relationship between maps and aesthetics. In this short paper, I will briefly discuss the reasons why aesthetics belongs in the development of cartographic theory and suggest possible avenues for further research.
Indigenous people throughout the world developed their own mapping skills and systems of knowledge. While Westerners are prone to overlook these communities' geographical knowledge and imagine their mapping activities to be primitive or non-existent, their mental maps are often impressive in sophistication and detailed even if based on cosmologies that are quite foreign to Western thinking. This article depicts a mental map of the ocean floor shared by Polynesians of Anuta, a remote community in the Solomon Islands. It situates Anuta's reef map in relation to academic discussions of indigenous cartography and describes the process that resulted in the map's physical representation.
The British Geological Survey is recognizing the consumer's needs for customized 'built-for-purpose' geoscientific data sets. It is witnessing a move away from being merely producers of standard scale cartographic products. This research proposes an automated tool for the generalization of geological maps, which may assist the organization in meeting these demands. The research shows that in order to derive a coarse scale geological map from a fine scale geological database there is a requirement for contextual sensitivity. To achieve an appropriate result the interaction between the themes represented on the map must be considered and should reflect the interaction of geological objects in the real world. A case study is presented which illustrates how standard cartographic generalization operations can be combined, using a rule base, into a partially automated process to generalize a geological data set from 1:50 000 to 1:250 000 scale. Independent geoscientific professionals evaluated the results from the case study. The tool provides consistency and tracability in the generation of multiscale geoscientific data. The evaluation suggests that, with further research, higher levels of autonomous generalization and achievable. In its current form it is a highly useful tool as a testbed for defining generalization requirements in geological mapping, an aid to the production of standard scale maps and a basis for creating customer specific data sets.
This paper describes the construction of land use classes during semi-automated generalization of a land cover map. The Centre for Ecology and Hydrology (CEH) has been responsible for the creation of the CORINE Land Cover Map of Great Britain (CLCMGB), using the ITE Land Cover Map of Great Britain (LCMGB) as the primary input. Several of the CORINE land cover classes are more accurately described as 'land use' classes, (e.g. airports and construction sites). Since a land cover class (as identified on the LCMGB) could be related to several uses, the CORINE land use classes had to be identified separately from the CORINE land cover classes, within the generalization procedure. This was done using traditional methods of visual image interpretation, combined with the extensive use of ancillary land use information. The interactive creation of the land use classes described in this paper is the main component that did not use wholly automated methods, 95% of the CLCMGB was created using automated methods. This paper describes the mapping of the land use classes in detail.
The opportunities presented by air photography in the production of topographical mapping were recognized almost as soon a slight and photography became possible. Military Survey used manual plotting methods from the first days of aerial cover but did not embrace stereoscopic plotting machines until the end of the Second World War. Anaglyph Multiplex machines were used in RE Survey uniformed units from then until the 1960s when the Wild B8 became the standard mapping instrument for the next 20 years. The computer-driven IMA replaced the B8, but in 1990 the role of Military Surey's soldiers changed and map production was no longer within their remit.
When Lord Kitchener ordered Sir Ian Hamilton in 1915 to command land operations on Gallipoli he gave him a solitary old One Inch map and denied him any air forces. When Winston Churchill had earlier sent the Royal Navy to break through to the Black Sea, he had ensured that the Royal Naval Division withdrawn from fighting on the Western Front was accompanied by a Naval Air Squadron as its forward reconnaissance element. Ernest Dowson, the Surveyor General of Egypt, appointed to provide local mapping support, soon convinced the Navy pilots of the value of air photographs taken systematically to met his map-making requirements. In September 1915 Dowson wrote a Secret technical report demonstrating for the first time to British Commanders the practicality of mapping for specified aeroplane photographs of the operational area.
In this article the author explain show military geographic information is being exploited by modern Armed Forces. In doing so he highlights some of the underlying principles of surveying and cartography that define paper mapping, and that are still applicable in the digital era. This article reflects the personal views of Lieutenant Colonel Prain who is currently serving the Headquarters of the Defence Geographic and Imagery Intelligence Agency.
A cursory glance through any number of newspapers and popular periodicals will usually reveal the use of some sort of a map as part of an article. This type of cartography is known as 'journalistic cartography'. Many of these maps are not the work of cartographers training. Despite this the maps produced are often very innovative, unique, and aesthetically attractive. However, journalistic cartography has come under increasing scrutiny from professional cartographers, many of whom are openly very critical of the quality and design of the maps appearing each day in 'the press'. But, whilst it can be argued that some journalistic cartography has a similar role to that played by traditional maps and atlases, the aim and purpose of many of these maps as a communication medium is clearly very different. Furthermore, the role and success of this cartography is dictated not only by the nature of the material, but also by the medium and the context in which the map is to be displayed and used. It is argued that by attempting to make these maps more cartographically correct may serve to remove, or at worst destroy, the freedom of expression typically associated with the development and evolution of this type of cartography over the years, and indeed its success as a medium of spatial communication. The aim of this paper is to briefly examine some of the characteristics and constraints associated with journalistic cartography, and to question the need to impose cartographic tradition on these examples.
Your car has broken down and you're telephoning the AA for help. You may be doing it from a draughty phone box, or with a mobile phone from the comfort of your driving seat. Either way, you'll probably visualise the controller at the other end of the phone punching some keys on a computer and identifying your location on screen on a digital map; If so, you're more or less right. The AA was in the forefront of the move to use on-screen mapping for this quintessential command and control application, and has been doing so throughout the 1990s. Computers have introduced a highly interactive new dimension to the task of managing the rescue service.
An examination of the purpose of text on the face of the map results in a taxonomy of text symbols used by cartographers. Text can be 'designative', reflecting the features portrayed by other map symbols, 'analytical', linking features on the map with their attributes and analysing relationships amongst features; 'positional', describing or confirming the location of features; and 'informative', giving a description of the nature of the source data. Map design aspects are considered in relation to text portrayal.
Due to human memory fails, a written record of cartographic materials held in a collection (of a mapmaker, map dealer, or of a map collector) became necessary; when materials held in several collections were to be recorded, or when several variants of one main item were to be compared, this became essential. However referred to ( as a list, inventory, catalogue, annotated checklist, bibliography, or database), standardization in recording the data elements, any 'free text' description, and citation order have been discussed - and promulgated - both internationally and nationally. A brief overview of 100 years of British cartobibliography, within an international (English-language) cataloguing context, is offered.
This paper presents a successful approach to learning tactile map skills in the field. During a three-phase project, visually impaired primary school children explored a route between afield studies centre and the village church. The first stage involved using non-visual senses to discover specific landmarks and the character of the parkland surroundings. Secondly, the children made their own tactile sketch maps of the route, and discussed the choice of symbols for a vacuum formed tactile map of the study area. Finally, a more detailed exploration of the route was accomplished with the help of a tactile map that set the path in the context of its surroundings.
This paper offers a review of the activities of Stirling Surveys, a small cartographic publishing company based in Stirling, Scotland. Established in 1987, the company produces maps for a range of clients in addition to publishing their own maps under the Footprint imprint. Meeting the needs of different map users in an effective way is central to the design and production of these maps. The demands of a small publisher operating in a niche market are also considered.
The hydrography of Cat Island, a rather small, albeit interesting feature in the Gulf of Mexico, is the subject of six generalizations executed with a procedure that replicates and extends Julian Perkal's proposal for an objective generalization. The automated procedure, based on the two operations known as waterlining and Medial-Axis Transformation is shown to lead to results that should be similar to those achieved by a trained cartographer working with the traditional manual method. Three aspects of generalization are covered by the procedure: line simplification in general, and dropping and aggregation of features of simple configurations. As regards Perkal's original objective, this presentation proves that it can be achieved by a combination of waterlining operations. The Medial-Axis Transformation, a concept developed within Pattern Recognition, is proposed as the best choice for spanning Perkal's boundary zones. The six generalizations are offered as evidence that the method preserved the general shape of features for lower scale factors and yields simple and compact shapes for larger factors. However, two problems were encountered that suggest that the method still needs further development in order to maintain its fully automated character, Or, alternatively, the method may need to be interlaced with the occasional use of interactive aids. The first of those two problems is encountered in attempting to bridge boundary zones of complex configurations. The second problem arises from the specifications for an autonomous feature dropping procedure and with the need to invoke it. Both problems are considered in some depth.
Map production has been seen previously as a standalone task, compiling information together from various sources to produce a particular cartographic product. This traditional view is now challenged by the availability of new environments which bring together databasing, object data modelling, image analysis, active agent behaviour and automated cartography to produce a unified flowline for production of multiple maps, charts, and geospatial data. This paper overview the capabilities of a modern map production application built around an object-oriented geospatial database, and specifically highlights its capabilities for active representation, multiple geometry and automated generalisation, in order to explore the benefits and future directions of active object mapping.
The work of the Ordnance Survey in Scotland has been rarely considered at a local level. Several bodies in Glasgow contributed to an extensive correspondence regarding the plan of the city and the appropriate scales of survey. This paper discusses the representation as an insight onto a wider perspective of the development of Ordnance Survey policy in the mid-Victorian era.
At the end of the 1980s, the computer experts who had been in the vanguard of cartographic development lost their position due to the fact that computers became democratised. This may be ascribed to the 'Macintosh' effect. This in turn led cartographic companies back to the core of their professional know-how: it is cartographers themselves who now develop the scope of their profession, utilising all the resources provided by the new computer technology. But, if cartographers want to keep playing a major role in the geographic information arena, they have to determine and develop the specific elements of their discipline: if technology mobilizes all forces to the detriment of theory, then the discipline progressively weakens and ends in being swallowed by another discipline. It is the cartographers' task to transform the spatial information from its verbal, social and numerical form into visual form for visual thinking; this visualisation provides for cognitive functions, communication functions, decision support functions and social functions. In order for maps to perform these functions cartographers should continue, now with digital tools, to safeguard data quality by monitoring the compilation stage during which they have to see to it that the heterogeneous datasets in databases will be made comparable, both from a geometrical, semantical, updatedness and completeness point of view. This main aspect of the cartographer's job can be called its engineering part. The other main aspect will remain the map design part, that leads to proper communication of the spatial information. Both aspects will remain the cartographer's domain if he/she succeeds in providing a theoretical basis for his/her work.
Using the example of the HND and degree courses at the University of Luton an examination of the nature and purpose of design education for cartographers and geographers is undertaken. An outline of the syllabus of one module in particular illustrates the necessary linkage between fundamentals of cartographic design and the new technologies in map production.
Taylor (1991) raises many timely issues and contributes to an ongoing debate about cartography's future developments in response to exciting new technologies. In reply, I place Taylor's comments in a wider context, to understand that technological developments are not simply neutral tools for cartographers to use, but arise because of understandable driving forces, which in turn come to dominate the discipline. I explore the implications of a technological and scientific cartography and argue that it is unnecessarily restrictive. An 'alternative cartographies' approach is proposed to supplement scientific cartography, which would include themes mooted by Harley, such as deconstruction and ethical cartography.
This paper describes an integrated technique for the generalization of contour maps. The technique consists of an objective line generalization algorithm (Li-Openshaw algorithm) and an algorithm for the derivation of a new contour from two original neighbouring contours. The algorithms are implemented in such a way that they guarantee (a) no self-intersection within a line and no cross-intersection between lines; (b) very smooth resultant contours; and (c) very coherent relationship between resultant contour lines, with shape very faithful to the original contours (at a larger scale). These conclusions have been supported by experimental tests. One of such tests are carried out through comparing the generalized results with the original contour lines and the other is through a comparison with a popular algorithm.
The author toured 25 cities in 11 countries of western Europe during 1995, in order to study their public transport maps and to meet the people responsible for them. He found distinct French, Scandinavian, and Dutch styles in addition to the classic style of public transport map. Rules are proposed to govern the choice of mapping method, based on the number of transport modes, number of transport services, amount of overlap, and the use of colour coding in the streets. Schematic maps, resembling the London Underground map are preferable for underground railways, but are definitely not suitable for buses. Factors in the design which need particular attention include: amount of base map detail, map size and purpose, emphasising the name of terminus, the problem of insets, panels at interchange points, and background colours. Types of maps, previously rarely used, which should now be economically feasible since the introduction of computer mapping, include: maps of subsets, stop-specific route maps, and 'octopus' bus maps of districts. For these proposals to be put into practice, GIS and graphics software, skills and data, found in different departments, will have to be brought together. A checklist is provided to ensure that the best results are obtained with the classic style.
This paper examines the significance of the ways in which maps have been organised into separate sheets for convenience of production and distribution;compacted from their original sheet format;and conserved in durable covers. This involves a discussion of sheet layouts for map series, folding systems and the related issues of back to back printing, title panels and protective covers.
Maps are a synthesis of art and science. They can deliver complex messages using graphic techniques which transcend the barriers of verbal language. A successful map stands on its own as a primary means of communication, is not merely decorative and needs very little text to supplement its message. This is the first in a planned series of three papers intended to stimulate interest in aspects of graphic design associated with the making of maps. The illustrations are presented here with a bare minimum of critical commentary. This is a deliberate policy on the part of the author who has chosen not to take a didactic approach. It is hoped that the paper will awaken sufficient interest in its readers to enable special map design sessions to be held at future BCS Technical Symposia. If future response merits, it may be possible to arrange for a special issue of The Cartographical Journal devoted to map design.
For the last two or three years there has been some debate and discussion about the modern validity of the definition of Cartography, which has now been used by the International Cartographic Association since the early nineteen seventies. This definition has its origins in an investigation made by the author in 1963 and 1964, though any credit for blame) for the final wording must be given to the original Council of the British Cartographic Society. The present paper traces the evolution of this definition and reproduces the original, unpublished document which I produced for the Council in February 1964. I make no attempt to redefine the word in 1991.
Many of the traditional data visualization techniques, which proved to be supportive for exploratory analysis of datasets of moderate sizes, fail to fulfil their function when applied to large datasets. There are two approaches to coping with large amounts of data: data selection, when only a portion of data is displayed, and data aggregation, i.e. grouping data items and considering the groups instead of the original data. None of these approaches alone suits the needs of exploratory data 1 analysis, which requires consideration of data on all levels: overall (considering a dataset as a whole), intermediate (viewing and comparing collective characteristics of arbitrary data subsets, or classes), and elementary (accessing individual data items). Therefore, it is necessary to combine these approaches, i.e. build a tool showing the whole set and arbitrarily defined subsets (object classes) in an aggregated way and superimposing this with a representation of 1 arbitrarily selected individual data items.
The revolution in aerial photography that has embraced the global geographic information industry is particularly strong in the UK. The revolution was spawned by the increasing power of the personal computer that enabled users to have access to large volumes of imagery converted into digital ortho photos. In the UK this revolution was driven by commercial companies who invested in creating large databases and have driven the resolution down to provide more and more detail. More recently the Ordnance Survey has entered the market with its own image layer as part of its MasterMap product, the large scale digital database of the GB. However, unlike many other countries across Europe, there has been little experience of publishing aerial photography in the form of photo maps in Britain, with a few notable exceptions. With the increased availability of aerial imagery there is an opportunity to re-visit this form of mapping and produce new and innovative forms of ortho photos integrated with other geographic information. This paper briefly describes some of the experiences of creating photo maps in Britain and looks at the current potential for new cartographic products.
We are now a point in the history of cartographic design and production where it can supersede all that has gone before, so why is it not doing so? When at last it has been released from the constraints of the past, it seems afraid to let go the apron strings of previous generations, slavishly reproducing computer imitations of styles developed some 50 years ago. Now is the time for maps to come alive, no need for symbology, the elements of the map can now be what they mean. Everything we have dreamed of for 1000 years is now at our fingertips, but our cartography is as torpid and barren as it always was. At the point of its rebirth cartography is playing dead. Like the Dodo, cartography has lost the will to fly, but fly it must, or be clubbed to death by progress. This paper looks at the philosophical basis of cartography, how this influences cartographic design through the emotional drive of expert centred problem solving. It then discusses the concept of 'Holistic Mapping', its outpouring into virtual reality, and how these images readily transform themselves into the 'Cartographic Visualisations'. Maps that have sky, and mist, and rain, and shadows, just like the real world.
GIS, environmental modelling and visualization techniques are increasingly being used together in environmental and forest management practices as decision support tools. There are many attempts to produce better integration of these techniques, especially advanced visualization techniques. This paper begins with the brief review of visualizations currently used in forest management, and then examines existing systems using those visualizations. An idealized forest decision support system is then proposed. The trend for spatial decision support system (SDSS) development is the integration of GIS, modelling and visualization. This paper classifies integration methodologies in terms of integration techniques applied and summarizes their advantages and disadvantages. Each approach is then compared based on the degree of interactivity, level of integration, and implementation effort required. The paper also describes and presents the results of several system developments attempted by the authors and briefly discusses the issues considered in their development and evaluation.
Separating figure from ground is a fundamental map design objective in all but the simplest maps. Psychological principles underlying the figure-ground relationship are presented as a basis from which to examine the role of value contrast in establishing figure-ground separation between land and water on maps. An experiment is described that comes to the conclusion that neither light nor dark areas are seen as figure if all other things are equal, and that knowledge of which area is land does not dictate that land will be seen as figure. Implication of results for development of exploratory visualisation tools are considered.
A dealer in second-hand maps, mostly Ordnance Survey maps, looks to the future of map dealers in the light of technological advances and the digital age.
Geovisualization offers powerful tools, techniques, and strategies to present, explore, analyze, and manage geoinformation. Interactive geovirtual environments such as virtual 3D maps or virtual 3D city models, however, raise the question how to control geodata usage and distribution. We present a concept for embedding digital rights in geovisualizations. It is based on geo-documents, an object-oriented scheme to specify a wide range of geo visualizations. Geo-documents are assembled by building blocks categorized into presentation, structure, interaction, animation, and Digital Rights Management (DRM) classes. DRM objects allow for defining permissions and constraints for all objects contained in geo-documents. In this way, authors of geo visualizations can control how their geo-documents are used, personalized, and redistributed by users. The strengths of the presented concept include the ability to integrate heterogeneous 2D and 3D geodata within a compact design scheme and the ability to cope with privacy, security, and copyright issues. Embedded digital rights in geovisualizations can be applied to improve the usability of geodata user interfaces, to implement publisher-subscriber communication systems for geodata, and to establish business models for geodata trading systems.
Exploring large volumes of geospatial data is difficult. This paper presents an approach that combines visual and computational analysis to make this process easier. This approach is based on the effective application of computational algorithms, such as the Self- Organizing Map (SOM). These are used to uncover the structure, patterns, relationships and trends in the data, and for the creation of abstractions where conventional methods may be limited In addition, graphical representations are applied to portray extracted patterns in a visual form that allows for better understanding of the derived structures and possible geographical processes, and should f acilitate knowledge construction.
Over the last three decades, the information revolution and technological advances have led to a paradigm shift in cartography. Recently, the major emphasis has been on 'democratization of cartography', where individuals can be empowered with electronic tools to analyse and visualize spatially referenced data (Morrison, 1994). But, an ordinary user can not effectively use the available GIS tools to visualize geographical data. Therefore, cartographers and/or GIS experts need to develop user-friendly map making systems to facilitate the democratization of cartography. A mapping system was designed using the advanced macro language (AML) and menus of ARC/INFO at the Curriculum for Evaluation and Management Centre (CEM) in Durham University to automate the mapping process (extending from spatial and non-spatial data extraction to the printing of a final map), so that any user can map pupils' locations of any school in the United Kingdom simply by entering some key information. The procedure followed to automate pupils' mapping is described in this paper. A similar programming approach can be helpful to automate mapping systems in a local network and on web.
In this paper, I wish to present briefly the development of the national atlas of Slovenia, its content scheme and cartographic and technical solutions, as well as the plans for publishing the atlas on a CD-ROM.
The ETH-Bibliothek (the Library of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology) in Zurich has employed electronic resources to vastly enhance access to its collections. This article examines how ETH has set about the task of incorporating electronic data into the map collection, and then explores how access to hard copy map materials has been revolutionized by electronic means.
Knowledge, especially the special knowledge about land use itself is an indispensable component for guiding the whole process of land use data generalization. In this study, such knowledge is classified into two broad types, i.e. general knowledge and thematic knowledge. General knowledge covers the basic and common restrictions and specifications for of geographic data. Thematic knowledge describes the special restrictions and specifications for a specfic geographic data or application. The paper emphasizes the use of thematic knowleage in detail for land use data generalization. Three main types of thematic knowledge are identified, i.e. nature-based, culture-based and application-specific. Such thematic knowledge is then represented using the so-called production-rule method to become generalization rules. These rules are built in a prototype system to guide the implementation of land use data generalization. Real-life data have been used for testing and very promising results have been obtained from this system.
The metaloging - cataloguing - of digital geospatial data is discussed. The following metadata schemas are briefly reviewed: Dublin Core; the US Federal Geographic Data Committee's 'Content Description for Digital Geospatial Data'; the ISO standard 19115 ( 2003), 'Geographic Information Metadata'; XML; METS; and MODS. This is followed by a brief description of The Alexandria Digital Library.
This paper describes the process confronting the UK Legal Deposit Libraries of selecting a system architecture and hosting for their store of digital cartographic data for the nation. These institutions have a mission not only to collect the published output of the national mapping agency, Ordnance Survey, but also to make it accessible to the public and ensure, via sound archival practices, that it be available in perpetuity. Considerations include how other institutions and agencies are handling similar issues, software and hardware to support the new GML file format, hosting to serve the application and data to the six libraries, and methods of archiving and preservation.
One goal of cartographic research is to improve the usefulness of maps. To do so, we must consider the process of spatial knowledge acquisition, the role of maps in that process, and the content of cognitive representations derived. Research from psychology, geography, and other disciplines related to these issues is reviewed. This review is used to suggest potential new directions for research with particular attention to spatial problem solving and geographic instruction. A classroom experiment related to these issues is then described. The experiment highlights some of the implications that a concern for the process of spatial knowledge acquisition will have on questions and methods of cartographic research as well as on the use of maps in geographic instruction. It also provides evidence of independent but interrelated verbal and spatial components of regional images that can be altered by directed map work.
Cartographic generalization aims at simplifying the representation of data to suit the scale and purpose of the map. This paper deals with a method that implements the whole graphic generalization process (roughly defined as the operators simplification, smoothing, exaggeration and displacement) called simultaneous graphic generalization. This method is based on constraints, i.e. requirements that should be fulfilled in the generalization process. The constraints strive to make the map readable while preserving the characteristics of the data, which implies that all constraints cannot be completely satisfied. This study was concentrated on finding the optimal compromise between the constraints in simultaneous graphic generalization by setting weights for the constraints. Four strategies for determining the weights are described and their advantages and disadvantages are discussed. The discussion is based on the following assumptions: the constraints are independent, and the weights are only dependent on constraint type and object type. A comparison of the strategies reveals that the strategy constraint violation is the most promising. One advantage with this strategy is that it is related to the quality requirements of the map, and another advantage is that it provides a numerical measure for quality assessment. The paper concludes with a case study of the constraint violation strategy, in which visualization of the numerical quality measure is used. The case study shows that the constraint violation strategy gives a sound compromise between the constraints.
Use of the ARC/INFO Geographic Information System (GIS) software, can contribute greatly to the rapid production of atlases with high accuracy and comprehensive information. The major thrust of GIS has been to integrate inherently geographical and non-geographical databases for decision-making processes. Databases to be included in the atlas can be captured and integrated in a GIS format using ARC/INFO. These databases can also be utilised for the production of paper as well as electronic thematic atlases using the map design facilities available with ARC/INFO. Before production of the final maps, a number of other questions need to be answered, such as for whom the atlas is being produced, what type of parameters are to be mapped, what should be the class interval and class limits, what type of shades and symbols should be used and what should be the map layout? This paper answers these questions on the basis of experience gained in the production of the Gender Atlas of India using ARC/INFO. The final version of this atlas will be published at the end of December, 1996.
During the German occupation of the Channel Islands, military geologists produced specialist maps to support their development as part of the Atlantic Wall: the line of fortifications marking the western boundary of German-occupied Europe. For Jersey, maps showed features of groundwater and quarry sites for building materials, primarily at a scale of 1 : 25 000. For Guernsey, maps at this scale were prepared to depict bedrock and superficial geology, and also maps which showed sites for building materials, water supply and features of military geology. For Alderney, maps at 1 : 10 000 showed bedrock geology, water supply, building materials plus tunnelling conditions, and military geology. Only after, contemporary copies of these maps were produced, hand-drain upon printed topographical base-maps. Some are now presented in Germany at the Bundesarchiv-Militarachiv others in the USA at the National Archives and Records Administration. They include the only military geology maps, the earliest large-scale groundwater maps and arguably the earliest large-scale building resources maps, for any part of the British Isles.
A main component of an Intelligent Transport System (ITS) is the navigation system to be used in the 'intelligent' vehicle. In fact, driving a vehicle is a complex task as the driver has to control the vehicle as well as make decisions about getting to his/her destination. Too much information on the map (i.e. a complex map) would confuse the driver, while too little information would not be sufficient for the user to compare with the actual environment. Sufficient information but poorly presented would also result in confusion. This paper reports on a study of the design of dynamic maps for land vehicle navigation through an investigation of different designs with different rent levels of information contents and visual effects using various dynamic variables. Different colours were assigned to the road and building names according to the position of the vehicle, and blinking symbols were used to indicate direction restrictions. Also, a set of maps with different degrees of complexity was designed such that the users would be provided with different levels of contents and representation by zooming in and out. The effectiveness of the design was investigated in the map evaluation process.
There is an information gap that severely restricts the lives of blind and visually impaired people. The author set up Describe Online in April 2000 to develop new solutions to this information gap through online text descriptions, improving accessibility of websites and revising product manuals to make them more informative to purchasers. Experience to date has revealed a spectrum of situations for which both tactile diagrams and text descriptions are both desirable and complementary. Whilst a tactile diagram should always be accompanied by some text annotation, at least to the extent of that which normally accompanies print diagrams, some text descriptions can be stand-alone and may be the only practical way to convey the necessary information. The converse is also true, there are many instances where text alone cannot convey the subtlety which could be presented via a tactile approach. The author wishes to explore this topic to see if criteria can be developed that could inform content providers of the extent to which these two complementary approaches should be adopted for each practical situation.
The lack hitherto of studies of cycle-touring mapping in Britain is noted, and some basic attributes of cycle touring including speed, daily distance, gradients and wind, are described. Essential and desirable qualities for a cycle-touring map are enumerated, including the need to depict all rural routs available to cyclists; it is concluded that the optimum scale is in the range of 1:100000-1:126720, and that relief should be shown by contours at an interval not greater than 30 metres. National mapping series in the optimum scale range which were published after 1945 are then reviewed, and reasons suggested as to why none has been kept in print. The mapping available for cycle touring in Britain in 2001 is critically described: it is noted that there is no national coverage in the optimum scale range; that although the Ordnance Survey (OS) 1:50000 Landranger series contains all the necessary information, it is too bulky to be suitable: and that most of the other maps published in the optimum scale have inadequate relief information and all offer very limited geographical cover. The potential competition for the OS 1:50000 from a national map series in the optimum scale range is acknowledged, and an outline specification for a 1:125000 series is described, which seeks to minimize that competition whilst providing all the necessary information for cycle touring.
With the increasing boom in the Internet, there is a virtual space termed cyberspace, parallel to the geographic world in which we are living. Cartography, as a discipline developed initially for mapping geographic space. It is now challenged to map virtual space. From the point of view of cartography, this paper attempts to define the special mapping of cyberspace by the cybermap. It is the authors belief that cartographers, with a long standing tradition of mapping geographical space, can make an important contribution to mapping cyberspace. A similar view is held by Plewe (1995, p. 2) who stated that cartographers are unique in their ability to display very complex information in a clear, understandable fashion.
The development of graphicacy in children has been a laudible and long standing aim of geographical education. The interaction between children and maps in a variety of circumstances is examined and the abilities of children to create their own maps are outlined. The conclusions from such studies can lead to recommendations for map design for children. In particular, the cognitive and graphic processes must be understood and applied.
In contrast to geocentric maps that remain up-to-date for a relatively long period and aim at communicating geoinformation in a balanced way to diverse users, egocentric maps are intended for short-term usage and individual users. There is an increasing awareness of egocentric map design for mobile applications - a phenomenon resulted from the rapid technical progresses and the growing demand on personalised geoservices. Some design patterns of egocentric maps in stationary cartographic systems are reusable and adaptable to mobile usage context, with the immediate usability being the essential constraint drawing together the research challenges involved in the design process.
This paper aims to evaluate what effect applying residents' urban image to virtual city design (a real time virtual model of an actual city) has on way finding performance during flying-based' navigation mode. Two experiments were conducted to compare two virtual city designs using the virtual model of Tel Aviv city. One design included highlighted urban elements from the residents' urban image, while in the second design no highlighted elements were included. The experiments proved that using the elements of the residents' urban image in a virtual city design enhances the performance of all participants in the wayfinding tasks, and especially those with a low level of spatial knowledge. Analysis of the trajectory patterns and the verbal reports of the participants during navigation showed that the urban image design facilitates a more intensive use of a position-based strategy, in addition to the path-integration wayfinding strategy, which was found to be dominant in the virtual model without the highlighted urban image elements. On the basis of these findings we propose principles for designing virtual cities from a perspective of wayfinding.
Responses to maps can be utilitarian, aesthetic or both, and have been the subject of research for almost forty years. These scientific studies, which advance with psychological thinking, have made only limited contributions to the understanding of practically effective design methods. Research into the whole cognitive process continues but focused enquiries into how readers react to map images during the early stages of viewing may provide more immediately-applicable guidelines for the developers of graphic design-support programs for desk-top mapping. The production of consistently legible and effective images may be a short-term goal but a fuller appreciation of map design must include consideration of aesthetics.
Spatially distributed probability density functions (pdfs) are becoming more relevant to Earth scientists and ecologists because of stochastic models and new sensors that provide numerous realizations or data points per unit area. One source of these data is from multi-return airborne lidar, a type of laser that records multiple returns for each pulse of light sent towards the ground. Data from multi-return lidar is a vital tool in helping us understand the structure of forest canopies over large extents. This paper presents visualization tools to allow scientists to rapidly explore, interpret and discover characteristic distributions within the entire spatial field. The major contribution of this work is a paradigm shift which allows ecologists to think of and analyse their data in terms of full distributions, not just summary statistics. The tools allow scientists to depart from traditional parametric statistical analyses and to associate multimodal distribution characteristics to forest structures. Information on the modality and shape of distributions, previously ignored, can now be visualized as well. Examples are given using data from High Island, southeast Alaska.
This paper describes the tapestry maps woven in England in the last years of the sixteenth century,for the Catholic Sheldon family of Beoley (Worcs.) and Weston (Warks.). It examines the nature of the problems encountered in their design and the sources adapted for their execution with particular reference to the maps of Christopher Saxton, traditionally regarded as the 'base map'. It considers also the identity of the designer.
With the development of computer technologies such as the Internet and virtual reality, the notion of cyberspace has been emerging and it has been increasingly studied by researchers in various disciplines involving the computer sciences, sociology, geography, and cartography. Cybermaps, as special maps for cyberspace, have been produced and used as a tool for understanding various aspects of cyberspace virtual worlds. Virtual worlds can be distinguished in many ways from the physical world we live in. Because of these distinctions, it is a big challenge for cartographers to offer some clarification. This paper addresses various mapping issues such as visualizing, analysing and exploring cyberspace from different aspects.
This paper describes the mapping of relative visibility of terrain across Scotland. The method presented can be used to calculate visibility levels at both local and regional scales, and for evaluating the relative visibility of land use features such as woodland. The implications for the management of computing resources are also discussed.
Newspapers have traditionally appeared in monochrome, thus newspaper map designers have for most of their careers needed to exploit the opportunities available with black and white cartography, and although aware of the constraints this imposes, they have been unable to experiment with the possibilities that colour holds. in recent years however this has changed. Advances in technology have allowed newspapers to print in four-colour - most noticeable in the use of colour photography - facilitating the use of colour maps. This paper discusses with examples how and why black and white maps are used in newspapers and what colour can add.
The age of the Internet poses new challenges to cartography.. While cartographic animation has become a practical alternative, it is mostly used to depict both spatio-temporal and non-temporal changes. Thepaper concentrates on the use of dynamic symbols on a static base map. A visual test was carried out to obtain some perspectives about the cartographic communication of blinking point and line symbols. The results confirmed that dynamic symbols tended to attract the attention of the users in general and even in situations when the foreground-background contrasts were poor. Their effectiveness was more pronounced with symbols of a larger size but tended to diminish with (in increasing number of blinking symbols. It was also observed that users were able to perceive differences in the frequency of flickering, particularly when the variationl was large. The line animation method (marquee and grow-out) did not yield a substantial difference in visual responses in the case of blinking line symbols.
Small-scale thematic maps that use point symbols to show the location of economic activity are a common feature of school atlases. They have, however, undergone a considerable amount of generalization in their preparation and we know little about how school students make meaning from them. Using a simple software mapping tool, SO pairs of school students, aged 11-14 years, were invited to make a map involving point symbol generalization in order to identify their mental representations of this type of thematic map. Using procedural `schema' diagrams, some common misconceptions are identified.
This paper describes our initial steps towards developing a model of how blind people comprehend tactile graphics. In the first half of the paper we set out the aims of the model, and then consider other key issues such as the nature and scope of the model, the information it must incorporate and the outcomes it should provide. In the second half of the paper we present our ideas for the model itself, outlining the four facets that make it up - perceptual processing, cognitive skills, knowledge and cognitive development. Throughout the paper we raise questions for open debate and invite feedback on our ideas.
A major project is building a specifically historical Geographical Information System (GIS) for Britain, mapping the evolving human geography of the past two centuries. This system combines the changing boundaries of administrative units with a large database of historical statistics. This paper focuses on England and Wales, where work is most advanced, and examines the sources for the mapping work, how the GIS is built the uses of the GIS to map past geographies and the potential for using mid-nineteenth-century boundaries for mapping much earlier sources including the Domesday Book.
The research project Paper and Virtual Cities, financed by the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO) and carried out by the Universities of Maastricht and Groningen, is developing new methodologies for the use of historical geographic sources in computer-assisted cartography. Manuscript and printed maps, atlases and other related texts are some of the sources we consider. One concept that is of particular interest at the onset of this project is that of the representation of 'truth' in geographic and historical visualisations.
This study examines the design of point symbols for tourist information on maps displayed on a CRT display within a public information system. The main aim was to investigate the effects of colour and size on the recognition of features. A further aim was to develop guidelines for the design of point symbols for such displays. A set of symbols were designed and subjected to preliminary comprehension tests. Test maps were developed and a wide range of users tested for search and recognition of the selected symbols. It was found that larger symbols performed better than medium symbols, which performed better smaller sized symbols. Black symbols were also found to perform better than red green or blue symbols of the same size.
Three common methods for producing tactile maps are mixed media, microcapsule paper and thermoform. This paper describes a new method for producing tactile diagrams using piezoelectric inkjet. To produce diagrams a photo-curing acrylic polymer ink is repeatedly printed onto a thermoplastic substrate and exposed to ultraviolet light which bonds the ink to the substrate and cures it solid. The speed and precision of the process means maps with fine, easily discriminated tactile features will be readily available to users. The new process will facilitate further psychological, psychophysical and cartographic research.
The survey and mapping activities which took place in Palestine and Mesopotamia during the First World War need to be considered in their contexts, both of long-tern British mapping activities in the region, and of survey and mapping generally during the First World War. Thus, while it is important to recognize the real technical advances in map-making which resulted from survey activities in the Near and Middle East during the First World War, it needs to be recognized that this was simply the culmination of nearly 80 years of British military mapping in the region. Each generation of surveyors used the most appropriate tools forth task in hand and the conditions under which the survey needed to be conducted. The First World War surveyors were fortunate that a new took, aerial photography, had become available just prior to the war.
An assessment of British responses to a pan-European questionnaire conducted during the summer of 2003.
The nature of the interdependent relationship between library and antiquarian map dealer is discussed. The author also explores what makes a good relationship between seller and both private and institutional buyers.
The internet provides almost unlimited opportunities for accessing information and on-line services. The government of Canada is restructuring its services to take advantage of this medium. While web-based distribution of visual maps has been a reality for several years, production of reaps for people with special needs poses new challenges, as additional accessibility requirements have to be met. This paper shares the Canadian experience of developing accessible tactile and audio-tactile maps for blind and partially sighted people. 'Government On-Line' involves partnerships between government departments to develop a portal specifically tailored to providing information and services for people with disabilities, their families, care givers and service providers. The Mapping for Visually Impaired Web site is an integral part of this broader initiative providing tactile maps for education, mobility training, transportation and tourism. Additionally a Web-4-All project will facilitate learning about Canada's geography and improve mobility options for blind and partially sighted people.
One of the essential ingredients in any map is the lettering. Just as point, line and area symbols are designed to depict various geographic features, lettering, also referred to as labels, type, text, etc., is used as symbols to name various features. Selecting an appropriate style and size for map lettering (Shortridge, 1979) is equally important to efficient cartographic communication as the placement of map lettering. This paper provides an extensive, descriptive rationale and a graphic solution for the many difficult problems associated with map lettering placement that are not treated specifically in Imhof's (1975) landmark article.
The paper presents an overview the development of techniques in and uses of tactile mapping 2 through the last fifty or so years. It provides both a background for the other papers in this issue, 3 and an account of the current state of the art. It notes that cartography has almost as much to learn from tactile cartography as vice versa, and suggests possible routes and areas for,future developments in tactile mapping and the education and care of blind and visually impaired people.
Environmental processes are a major point of concern for researchers, environmental engineers and the general public. This paper presents a multi-user mobile system to visualize environmental processes. This system enables multiple users to visualize and simulate environmental processes, and also retrieve additional information in real time, while moving through the environmental area under analysis. Each user is able to contribute to the simulation and assess the impact of adding or removing agents to or from the model, respectively. This system uses a modular approach, allowing its deployment through different platforms. Two main modules compose the system under development: a geo-referenced model and an Augmented Reality (AR) composition module. The georeferenced model describes the environmental processes being modelled and tracks all users. The AR composition module allows users to visualize the geo-referenced model evolution and to interact with the model through two different views, namely animated map view and AR view.
A 1985 article reported on a visual search experiment using tourist symbols. Subsequently it appears that the conclusions of the experiment have been misinterpreted by several authors. One of the original researchers provides further clarification of the principles and results.
As we grapple with contemporary debates about how to regulate our campaign finance system, we tend to view each reform proposal in isolation, This brief essay examines how democratic theory about the problems associated with aggregating preferences spread across more than two options, tempered with empirical observation and a few hard-nosed assumptions, can instruct our thinking about discrete reform proposals. An unintended consequence of regulating the financing of individual campaigns is an increase in funding for advocacy of specific issues, a trend that could destabilize democratic politics. The appropriate response to this real concern is not to regulate issue advocacy, but to deregulate private funding of political parties.
Taiwan held its first democratic presidential elections in March 1996, which motivated mainland China to stage large scale contemporaneous war games in the Taiwan Strait and aim unusually belligerent rhetoric at Taipei. The United States responded by deploying substantial naval forces in the area. After examining this confrontation between China, Taiwan, and the United States in terms of the 1979 Taiwan Relations Act, international law, and non-nuclear deterrence theory, the author presents a novel analysis of indirect deterrence communication between the United States and China.
This Article explores the clash between federal policies encouraging wireless communications services and the application of local land use regulations to the siting of telecommunications towers. It concludes that Congress's effort to strike a balance in the Telecommunications Act of 1996 between local concerns on one hand and national commerce and homeland security on the other, has proved vague in content and susceptible to procedural thickets that might make local parochialism impervious to challenge. The Article suggests statutory changes, including time limitations and the creation of presumptions and safe harbor rules, that might better balance infrastructure development needs with local autonomy.
Medical malpractice insurance crises seem to recur with distressing frequency. Indeed, the escalating costs of malpractice insurance premiums have become the focal point for advocates of tort reform. While we know quite a bit about the medical malpractice system, we know very little about what might work to fix things. Many reforms have been tried; little has worked. The two most commonly attempted reforms - at least at present - are legislatively imposed caps on noneconomic damages (i.e., pain and suffering) and the use of screening panels. Neither of these alternatives offers a satisfactory resolution to the problem. This Article proposes the use of voluntary caps, selected (if at all) by the plaintiff and the plaintiffs attorney. By the use of three separate litigation tracks, incentives can be provided for plaintiffs to agree to caps on damages, while also providing separate inducements for the insurers who defend malpractice defendants and the physicians that they insure. The underlying benefit for all would be substantially reduced costs of litigation. The end result would be improved access to the courts for injured plaintiffs and a more rational claims resolution system. Legislation implementing the proposal would not be necessary; tailored discovery scheduling orders would suffice. In a politically charged climate, broad scale, equitable reform is not likely. Instead, we should begin a steady movement toward such reform in stages. We need to learn to crawl, before we can walk.
As explained by Ronald Tabak in his introduction to this Symposium, the Task Force on Mental Disability and the Death Penalty (Task Force) established by the Individual Rights and Responsibilities Section of the American Bar Association (ABA-IRR) has proposed that the ABA adopt three recommendations concerning the role of mental disability in capital cases. The first two recommendations call for a prohibition on execution of offenders whose mental disorder rendered them less culpable at the time of the offense, and the third would prohibit execution of those whose mental disability currently renders them incompetent to pursue appeals or to be executed. This Article discusses the first two, culpability-related, recommendations. With respect to each recommendation, this Article first presents the language of the recommendation, then provides the related commentary currently approved by the Task Force (which, as an unofficial reporter for the Task Force, I had a significant hand in writing), and finally engages in a brief discussion of some of the controversies that each recommendation might occasion.
Historians who have enquired how the Romantic movement can be discerned in the physical sciences, have often suggested that nineteenth century confidence in the unity and interconnectedness of nature is a product of Romantic influence. Though this view is supported by good evidence, it has the distinct disadvantage of clashing with other widely held opinions about the nature of Romanticism. For despite the considerable disagreements among scholars specialising in this area, there is substantial acceptance that Romanticism was associated with a rejection of Neoclassical emphasis on unity, universality, and uniformity. Romantic thinkers by contrast placed value on the characteristics of objects which distinguished them from other objects, and thus emphasised the idiosyncrasies of the world instead of its regularities - they opposed rather than endorsed a view of nature which emerged from the Scientific Revolution. In the present paper, the clash between these contrasting characterisations of Romanticism is examined through a close dissection of the issues at stake in a dispute centred on one of the most important episodes in the history of optical technology, the mid-eighteenth realisation that it is possible to use combination lenses to correct chromatic aberration. The disagreements attached to this discovery are visibly centred on a fundamental question in the philosophy of nature: in what sort of patterns are the properties of objects distributed? Does nature allocate refractive indices in a unified, lawlike fashion? Or erratically and idiosyncratically, as the success of the new designs would imply? The paper presents a sketch of the process which led to the acknowledgement that achromatic lens-design was a possibility; and proposes an interpretation of this process - as part of a rediscovery of individual idiosyncrasy. The new optics it led to is accordingly suggested as an alternative specimen of the sort of physics which might be counted part of the Romantic movement. To support this interpretation, the writings of some major figures attached to the Romantic movement (Novalis, Shelley, Goethe and Schelling) are briefly surveyed, to confirm that dispersion phenomena were widely seen, around 1800, as illustrating the diversity of nature. The apparent clash with the belief that Romanticism stimulated a search for unity is resolved by noting that such a search only makes sense if diversity is recognised, and evidence is provided that this is how major Romantic thinkers interpreted their activities. Two opposing characteristics can thus both be examples of a Romantic outlook.
In markets with ongoing technological progress, buyers must choose when to buy. These buy/wait decisions may have a significant impact on innovators' and buyers' surpluses. In making these decisions, buyers often rely on information provided by firms. For instance, it is a common practice for firms to announce new products well in advance of actual market availability in information goods industries such as computer software. However, since sellers and buyers, in many cases, have opposing interests, it is difficult for a firm to make credible product pre-announcements. In this paper, we study when and how firms can make credible pre-announcements. We focus particularly on how firms can build a reputation for being honest. We also review the literature on the effects of product pre-announcement on market competition and discuss several open issues in need of further research.
Labor market institutions, via their effect on the wage structure, affect the investment decisions of firms in labor markets with frictions. This observation helps explain rising wage inequality in the US, but a relatively stable wage structure in Europe in the 1980s. These different trends are the result of different investment decisions by firms for the jobs typically held by less skilled workers. Firms in Europe have more incentives to invest in less skilled workers, because minimum wages or union contracts mandate that relatively high wages have to be paid to these workers. I report some empirical evidence for investments in training and physical capital across the Atlantic, which is roughly in line with this theoretical reasoning.
Martin Peitz and Patrick Waelbroeck's An Economist Guide to Digital Music is an insightful exposition of the effects of digitization on the music industry. The authors survey an impressive body of market research, surveys and economic papers, and provide an original and precise analysis of the issues that the industry is facing due to digitization, including file sharing on peer-topeer (P2P) networks or the introduction of digital rights management systems (DRM). Since the digitization of the music industry is a very good example of the impact that information and communication technologies can have at the industry level, it is of great interest for any economist to read this guide. In this comment, I shall add a few additional points about the impact of the digitization of music on the record industry. In what follows, I start by discussing some consequences of digitization on the use and sale of music. Then, I analyze the specificities of the current digital crisis, compared to crisis of the past.
This paper reports on research that uses computational techniques to assess whether or not various propositions that have been advanced as plausible in the literature on the theory of customs unions actually hold. This research blends theory and numerical simulation to get insights into the likelihood that various theoretical propositions proposed in the customs union literature hold.
Price discrimination consists in selling the same product to different buyers at different prices. When sellers cannot relate a buyer's willingness to pay to some observable characteristics, price discrimination can be achieved by targeting a speck package (i.e., a selling contract that includes various clauses in addition to price) for each class of buyers. The seller faces then the problem of designing the menu of packages in such a way that each consumer indeed chooses the package targeted for her. This practice, known as versioning (or as second-degree price discrimination), is widespread in the information economy. In this paper, we propose a simple unified framework to study the general theory behind versioning and to consider a number of specific versioning strategies used in the information economy (namely, bundling, functional degradation and conditioning prices on purchase history).
The present paper describes recent research on two central themes of Keynes' General Theory: (i) the social waste associated with recessions, and (ii) the effectiveness of fiscal policy as a stabilization tool. The paper also discusses some evidence on the extent to which fiscal policy has been used as a stabilizing tool in industrial economies over the past two decades.
The object of this paper is to discuss intermediation on-line from the perspective of two-sided markets. It builds a simple model of the intermediation activity when trading partners are involved into a commercial relationship and uses it to illustrate some of the results that emerge in the two-sided market literature, as well as to discuss some new aspects. The first part concentrates on a monopoly intermediation service and discusses both efficient pricing and monopoly pricing. The second part discusses the nature of competition between intermediaries, addressing issues such as competitive cross-subsidies, multi-homing or tying.
After a brief review of the main differences between New and Old Keynesian economies from the sixties this paper focuses on a tension between traditional sluggish measures of potential output commonly used by policy makers and the New Keynesian (NK) notion of this variable which conceptualizes it as the level of output that would have been produced under perfect competition had all prices and wages been flexible. The paper shows that, under monopolistic competition, NK potential output is often more volatile than the level of output produced under sticky prices and wages implying either of the following. Real life policyinakers mistakenly target smooth versions of output or (since actual economies are monopolistically rather than perfectly competitive) the flexible price and wage equilibrium does not necessarily maximize welfare. The paper shows, that depending on the shape of the utility function and of the distribution of productivity shocks either case is possible and proposes a criterion for discriminating between them.
Software platforms are a critical component of the computer systems underpinning leading-edge products ranging from third-generation mobile phones to video games. After describing some key economic features of computer systems and software platforms, the paper presents case studies of personal computers, video games, personal digital assistants, smart mobile phones, and digital content devices. It then compares several economic aspects of these businesses including their industry evolution, pricing structures, and degrees of integration.
There is no consensus about the causes of the reduction in business cycle volatility seen in many major economies over the last decade. Using stylised models of the economies of the US, Euro area, UK and Japan, we argue that economic stabilily has been fostered by improved monetary policy and by associated changes in the behaviour of inflation, which has itself led to a reduction in the volatility of economic shocks. Our projections suggest that a number of major economies could continue to enjoy an unusual degree of stability, granted average luck and current institutions.
The abolition of intra-EU duty,free was critically discussed and accompanied by a vigorous and well-financed lobbying campaign by the duty free industry. The opponents of this resolution argued that such a tax-free sales sector created jobs and hardly reduced the value added and excise tax revenue of individual countries. In their opinion, the duty free trade not only contributed to the reduction of the travel fare but also could be characterised as a supplement to the normal retail trade for some products. The challenges for some specific industries led by the abolition of duty free shopping appear to be considerable in the short-term. However, theoretical and empirical examinations made in this study suggest: (a) intra-EU duty free shopping disturbs the allocation neutrality guaranteed in the single market, (b) macroeconomic significance of duty free shopping is rather negligible, and (c) some background studies made for the lobbyists exaggerate the negative impacts of eliminating intra-EU duty free shopping. These three important arguments, which can also be applied to the new EU Member States, justify the abolition of intra-EU duty free shopping.
This paper provides an overview of recent papers which use estimated New Keynesian models to study the extent to which fiscal policy can be used to stabilize the economy. We use a variety of different New Keynesian models, estimated on data for both the US and for the Euro area, and highlight the diverse transmission channels through which fiscal policy acts in these models. Although we find that fiscal policy can provide a useful complement to monetary policy, especially in models where consumers have finite horizons, there are important limitations to the value added of fiscal policy.
This paper surveys the extant literature on the impact of file-sharing on the recording industry. It begins by examining the theory behind the impact of file-sharing. One novelty from this analysis is the finding that the effect of 'sampling' of copyrighted materials can be expected to have a negative impact on copyright owners, quite the opposite of the impact normally assumed. Overall, although one can create hypothetical situations where network effects might allow file-sharing to be beneficial to copyright owners, the expectation that file-sharing would harm copyright owners appears a far more realistic outcome. The analysis then turns to the empirical work that has been performed up to the time this paper was written. The various approaches are critiqued and compared. I posit some explanations for the variations in results and conclude that the evidence strongly suggests that file-sharing harms the sound recording industry.
Evans, Hagiu and Schmalensee have produced a useful empirical piece. Its main strength is that it relies on the same format and organising principles for each of the five industries covered. This makes it easier to compare them in order to isolate stylised facts and to identify puzzles. Two main themes emerge. Firstly, there is significant heterogeneity in the observed business models across industries, across firms and over time. Secondly, firms that choose the platform model exhibit complex pricing structures. Moreover platforms appear to get most of their revenues from one side of the market. This discussion will focus entirely on the second theme, trying to assess the extent to which the emerging theoretical literature on multi-sided markets helps us to understand pricing behaviour of software platforms.
Data from official statistics and tax laws are exploited to describe fifty years of income taxation in Germany, with a focus on its role as a fiscal and distributive tool. The temporal pattern that emerges from the data is one of a golden age of the German income tax, followed by a slow shift towards a major crisis. The turning point on the income-tax path seems to have occurred in 1986. I put forward the thesis that this downturn was the outcome of a long-term change in the balance of political power. That change is probably rooted in structural breaks that occurred in the German economy during the 1970s and early 1980s.
We analyze how the introduction of digital technologies for storing and distributing information affects the incentives to enforce copyrights protection. We first characterize the conditions under which the change from non-digital to digital distribution may enhance or reduce profits. Secondly, we analyze how profits are changed by the introduction of peer-to peer digital distribution channels via the Internet. Lastly, we discuss some potential conflicts of interest among information creators, publishers, and attorneys.
In this guide, we discuss the impact of digitalization on the music industry. We rely on market and survey data at the international level as well as expert statements from the industry. The guide investigates recent developments in legal and technological protection of digital music and describes new business models as well as consumers' attitude towards music downloads. We conclude the guide by a discussion of the evolution of the music industry.
This paper builds on the papers published by HM Treasury in 2003 alongside the UK Government's assessment of the case for EMU entry. The paper considers the potential for fiscal policy to play a greater role in stabilisation policy if the UK were inside EMU. The paper considers: the scope for strengthening the automatic stabilisers and the possible trade-offs; how institutional changes could increase the effectiveness of discretionary fiscal policy; which fiscal instruments might be most effective; and to what extent stabilisation might be promoted in other ways, such as through enhanced risk sharing by financial markets.
In this paper we assess the empirical performance of commonly used empirical specifications of the baseline New Keynesian model for the US and the euro area. We estimate standard specifications of the model and extended specifications also including non-standard determinants of aggregate supply and demand The results suggest that based on the standard specifications it is often not possible to establish a significant link between the monetary policy instrument and output and inflation. Based on the extended specifications of the model, which take into account the significant effect of commodity prices on inflation and of house prices on the output gap, we are generally able to restore a significant monetary transmission channel.
This paper examines the role of the natural rate of interest in the conduct of monetary policy. The natural rate figures prominently in many theories of the business cycle and of inflation fluctuations, and therefore has the potential to play a key role in monetary policy given the current mandates of many central banks. However, the presence of financial imperfections and measurement uncertainty draw into question whether estimates of the natural rate can be reliable indicators of excess demand pressures. Natural rate-based theories may, nonetheless, provide useful guidance in the formulation of desirable monetary policies.
This paper puts into perspective the early patterns of retailers' adoption of e-commerce across product categories and firm types. The focus is on understanding how consumer loyalty, differences in firms' technology and consumers' preferences across the traditional versus the virtual market, and expansion in market size made possible by the Internet affected the timing and sequence of adoption by firms, as well as the post-adoption evolution of prices. The empirical evidence on adoption patterns is discussed in the light of the predictions from a model of technology adoption.
Regulation of the employment contract is both wide spread and diverse. The diversity of regulation is surprising because it suggests that there is little consensus regarding optimal intervention into the labor market. This paper discusses several economic reasons why it may be efficient for employers and employees to enter into long term contracts that make employee dismissal expensive. This analysis suggests that employment contracts can be expected to be complex in practice, and hence can be viewed as part of the technology of exchange. Given that knowledge of a technology requires skill and know-how, one cannot expect all employee-employer matches to discover and use the most efficient contract terms possible. It is suggested that the regulation of the employment relationship might be improved with the creation of a market for contracts, similar to the one that currently exists in the United States for construction projects.
After a brief review of classical, Keynesian, New Classical and New Keynesian theories of macroeconomic policy, we assess whether the New Keynesian Phillips curve and the New Neoclassical Synthesis capture the quintessential features stressed by J.M. Keynes. Particular attention is paid to Keynesian features omitted in New Keynesian Workhorses such as the micro-founded Keynesian multiplier and the New Keynesian Phillips curve. These theories capture wage and price sluggishness and aggregate demand externalities by departing from a competitive framework and give a key role to expectations. The main deficiencies of the New Neoclassical Synthesis, however, are its inability to predict a pro-cyclical real wage in the face of demand shocks and the absence of inventories, credit constraints and bankruptcies in explaining the business cycle. Furthermore, it fails to allow for quantity rationing and to model unemployment as a catastrophic event. The macroeconomics based on the New Keynesian Phillips curve that has quite a way to go before the quintessential Keynesian features are captured.
The paper aims at comparing the formal and informal labour markets in the Central and Eastern European new EU Member States and candidate countries of the European Union. First, the current situation of the labour market is described, focusing on the recent developments since the breaking up of the East. Then the policy design of these labour markets is depicted and its effects on formal and informal labour markets. The most important challenges for employment policy as well as the effects of enlargement on the labour markets are analysed. The paper ends with a short summary.
`This paper discusses the need and scope for an active fiscal stabilization policy. It is argued that the effectivness of fiscal policy as a short run stabilizer does not depend on the long run multipliers of (balanced budget) fiscal policies. To the extent that activity can be affected by aggregate demand in the short run, there is a case for a fiscal stabilization policy in terms of temporary variations in taxes or public Consumption contingent on the state of the economy. The effectiveness of fiscal policy is supported by empirical evidence. However, an appropriate policy intervention depends both on the nature of the shock and the structure of the economy. There are thus fundamental information problems in pursuing discretionary fiscal policies on top of political economy concerns, and fiscal fine-tuning is not to be recommended. Automatic stabilizers do not to the same extent suffer from these problems, but their strength is not by design but the net result of other policy considerations. Hence, there is a need to consider the structure and size of automatic stabilizers.
Martin Buber has dealt with the concept of encounter from the philosophical point of view, including it into the sphere of the Me-You relation. From the psychological point of view, this phenomenon occurs not only in the framework of intensive psychotherapeutic relation, but also within intimate interpersonal relations of common life. It is an important theme of humanistic psychology, especially of Rogers' psychotherapy. Encounter occurs within the sphere of psychotherapeutic relation, if the therapeut is accepting, empathic, and authentic towards the patient. The unreserved acceptation is especially necessary. By means of it we acknowledge the other one in his/her existence and in the process of becoming himself/herself. The phenomenon of encounter is usually preceded by emphasizing own individuality followed by releasing personality limits, overlapping of one subjectivity into the other, and by unity experience. It is always a mutual affair. By means of encounter, the acknowledgment and strengthening of self, i.e., of one's own identity takes place; this phenomenon can be included among the efficient factors of psychotherapy.
Czech version of JEPQ was submitted to confirmatory factor analysis using data on 1184 girls and 1237 boys, age range 11 - 14 years. Using standardized regression equations from congeneric analyses 21 item from the 81 original ones were removed in order to reduce measurement noise. The overall confirmatory factor analysis based on 60 x 60 polychoric matrix, using full LISREL 7 (ML) procedure, showed that GFI was 0.90, AGFI 0.893, (RMR = 0.105), and generally supported expected four-factor structure of the JEPQ instrument, but RMR index (0.105) indicated that certain amount of variance remained unexplained suggesting that finding should be interpreted cautiously. Internal consistency of JEPQ scales (normalized Cronbach coefficient alpha) ranged from 0.47 to 0.96 a stability in time (ten-week-interval) range was r=0.64 - 0.74. Trend analysis, using boys and girls responses separately, supported the hypothesis of linearity of changes in the JEPQ scores during four-year-interval. Apart from L scale, equality of slopes (parallelism), for boys and girls data was confirmed for all scales. The findings are very similar to that obtain on the British population and the shortened Czech JEPQ version can be recommended for experimental use, especially E and N scales.
The study sums up several better as well as less known tests of memory for children and partly for adults. It deals with practical possibilities of these tests and presents their norms. The Svancara's revision of Meili's tests and tests of memory by Zlab, resp. Tumpachova, are introduced. It deals with the memory test of learning by Rey (Auditory verbal learning test). It also presents the original norms of Rey for the complex figure tests. The study points out the usefulness of memory tests in clinical practice.
The author overlooks the selected views at the continuity of time and psychotherapy. He tries to do so at the level understandable also to the colleagues who work beyond the sphere of psychotherapy. The following problems are discussed in particular: time of the therapy lasting, use of developmental periods of human life, time as the goal of the treatment, relativity of time in psychotherapy. In the conclusion, it is stated that time can be looked at in the most different aspects and modifications. At last, however, the aim should always be to understand oneself better in time, and to find the most satisfactory relations to other people in it.
The significance of intercultural psychology in the system of psychological sciences is discussed. In order to increase the effectivity of the research of cognitive processes, the institutionalization on intercultural cognitive psychology'' as psychological discipline that studies the impact of individual cultures on different aspects of information processing, obtaining information about external and internal reality and its using for the decision control and activity realization'' is suggested. Processes are analysed, by means of which man manipulates with information. Further on, specificities of categorization and classification, possibilities of maintaining the classified pieces of knowledge, as well as their using in the process of problem solving and intellectual activities are referred to. The occurrence of ''etics'' (culturally universal) and ''emics'' (culturally specific) variables is considered. In the conclusion, the contextual character of human recognition is pointed out - conclusions for practice are deduced from it. Methodological inaccuracies resulting in inaccurate conclusions about the inferiority of some social and cultural groups are refused.
The aim of this work is to study the influence of language on the perception Of interpersonal characteristics of behaviour, from the viewpoint of their content and structure of meaning for the subject of social cognition. We focused our attention on the perceiving of identical interpersonal personality characteristics expressed by different linguistic means, namely by adjectives and verbs. On scales of semantic differential, the subjects evaluated interpersonal characteristics of personality formed according to the Wiggins and Leary's circular model of interpersonal personality characteristics. The semantic differential was formed by 25 bipolar scales of adjectives related to dimensions of personality. To each octant a corresponding adjective (expressing the quality) and verb (expressing activity) were chosen - i.e., 8 adjectives and 8 verbs. In the first stage, we determined the profile of qualities in respondents, and of activities they carry out - profile A; profile, B was formed by qualities missing in respondents, and by activities they do not carry out We fond that semantic profiles of qualities and activities I have (profile A) are statistically significantly different - qualities are evaluated in a more positive way as compared to activities. Activities (verbs) are closer to the neutral centre. In the second stage, we were finding out the structure of meaning of interpersonal adjectives and verbs by means of factor analysis. Factors of the adjectives meaning (social assertivity, neuroticism, evaluation, sociability, social openness) concern rather the content of interpersonal traits of personality, while in verbs only the first three factors (social assertivity, evaluation, social openness) can be interpreted in such a way, and the fourth factor (neuroticism) indicates the evaluation of the course and the manner of carrying out the given interpersonal activity. The contribution of the presented research consists in throwing light upon new aspects of social perception at the level of the theory of personality, the possibility of their application to clinical and counselling practice included. Further on, the results of the research provide new methodological information that has got direct importance for the construction of questionnaires and other methods based on verbal answers of respondents.
The Czech version of the Eysenck Personality Questionnaire (EPQ/R) was subjected to psychometric analysis based on responses of 2212 subjects (males=1203, average age 28.2, SD=11.3; females=1009, average age=28.9, SD=10.9). The exploratory factor analysis (maximum likelihood, extraction according to postulated four dimensional space, rotation to varimax criterion) accounted for 19.5% of variance. The factor structure approximated satisfactorily the simple structure for E, N and L scales only. The internal consistency analyses of the EPQ/R scales suggest item redundancy. Fewer items might provide more efficient measurement. The MANOVA of the EPQ/R scales using sex and age intervals (16-20, 21-30, 31-40, 41-55 ys) as classification variables revealed the statistically significant interaction of the independent variables. The means, SD, skewness, and curtoisis of the scales distribution are Presented with regard to sex and age intervals.
When discounting information needed for solving a problem, we unconsciously ignore or deteriorate it. The model (table) of discounting introduced by Mellor and Sigmund (1975) assumes a hierarchy of levels of discounting between the psychoanalytical denial (Verleugnung) and suppression (Hemmung). The article makes the reader acquainted with this model and shows its applicability to smoking disaccustoming: to diagnose discounts and the usage of these diagnoses in making therapeutic contracts. Further, the possibility of influencing motivation, and planning national health education programmes, is shown.
The authoress is concerned with theoretical presumptions of psycholinguistic study of personality, as well as with its limitations and different approaches to the formation of taxonomies of personality descriptors. The best known list of personality relevant terms according to the in advance selected criteria set up by Allport and Odbert, was preceded by attempts at the selection of personality descriptors in German and English. Cattell took up the preceding research and, by means of cluster analysis, identified the most general dimensions of personality anchored in language. Cattell's research has inspired a number of other scientists who - on the basis of the by him classified variables - arrived at different factor solution. Though the number and interpretation of individual factors are discussed, the majority of authors agree with the fact that five factors - Extraversion, Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, Emotional Stability, and Intellect and/or Culture - can be identified on the basis of the lexicon analysis. Effort aimed at verifying the five-factor personality structure on the basis of selected variables independently of Cattell has become an incentive for Norman who set up new taxonomic system. Taxonomy in English was also developed by Goldberg, who classified not only the personality relevant adjectives, but also substantives. Taxonomy of personality descriptors in Dutch has already been done in case of adjectives, substantives, and verbs. The most thoroughly worked out taxonomic system is the German one, used by taxonomists on other languages (Italian, Polish, Hungarian, Czech), too. The concluding chapters deal with the Russian taxonomicly oriented research, as well as with the Czech taxonomy. Taxonomy of personal descriptors is the first step in understanding personality traits that are coded in language and in the way, in which these traits are structured.
Internal structure of the DEP36 - subjective emotional balance estimation questionnaire which consists of positive and negative affect scales - was tested using data on a sample 362 men and 461 women. Exploratory factor analysis (ML, direct oblimin), congeneric, confirmatory factor analyses (LISREL VII), and Cronbach alpha coefficients generally supported the claimed structure of the DEP36 instrument.
The study presents the results of observation that were collected as a by-product of the main activity: collecting foundation data focused on the assessment of method evaluating the behaviour of a new-born child. It concerns the results of observing common situations in which the mother and the child appear during their stay in maternity hospital. It contents the description and analysis of situations whose consequences endanger the mutual interaction mother-child that is being formed, as well as the healthy development of the child. Authors refer to the necessity of satisfactory accepting the psychic needs of the mother and the child. In the conclusion, authors suggest accessible measures aimed at the change of present conditions.
The study concerns problems of life casualties as seen from the biodromal aspect. The authoress follows up two aims: First, to introduce some sort of system into the existing knowledge about the life casualty and its place in the life--span development. Second, to characterize general strategy and principles of psychological/counselling interventions in the process of grief. In harmony with the above-mentioned aims, she starts with the definition of the life casualty in a wider sense, introduces a classification of life casualties, analyzes the process of grief that is a form of managing with life casualties. She describes symptoms and stages of the process of grief. In the second part of the study, she deals with general strategies of psychological/counselling interventions in the process of grief as related to the variety of life casualties. She applies psychotherapy to the psychological/counselling process. Closer attention is paid to the following elements of intervention strategies in the process of grief: (a) to the conclusion of an explicit agreement between the counselling psychologist and the client on being concentrated on the life casualty; (b) to a more immediate presentation of the lost object in the conscience of the client: (c) to the identification of the client's emotions as related to the grief, and to the facilitation of their manifestations; (d) to the facilitation of an explicit dissociation of the client from the lost object, and to his/her linking up with another supporting system; (e) to the monitoring of the counter-transfer responses. The authoress points out the increasing importance of the developmental conception of intervention in the process of grief, which is the basis of the grief counselling that is being formed. In her opinion, the problem of life casulties and managing with them should become a part of general psychological education.
The authors are dealing with the possibilities of measurement of intelligence. its distribution and its practical application in sex offenders. They come to the following conclusions: 1. the higher level of intelligence in the offender of a sexual crime increases statistically the probability of the fact that the motivation of the act is deviant, 2. the situation of sex minorities members makes the realization of their intellectual dispositions difficult, 3. the heterogeneity in the selection of groups investigated causes the methodological problems (e. g. in mixed groups formed by deviant and non-deviant offenders), 4. in mentally retarded offenders. there are difficulties in diagnostics when differentiating substitutional sexual behaviour from the behaviour motivated by a genuine sex deviation, 5. the methodics for measurement of social intelligence in sex offenders regarding their possibilities of incorporating in couples and the prognosis of social behaviour is missing.
The study deals with the conception of aggression suggested by G. V. Caprara and his colleagues that represents a turn-over from the unitary conception of aggression towards the specifying one. The elements of this approach are the personality predictors of aggression - Tolerance towards aggression, Rumination about aggression - Dissipation of aggressive thoughts, Fear of Punishment, Need for Reparation, Irritability and Emotional Susceptibility. It seems that these indicators are compatible with other personality characteristics and that their structural relations can become the basis of effective diagnostics and correction of aggression. Within the research into aggression, Caprara's theory represents an attempt at formulating a completely new paradigm. The author of the study calls this approach ''an open conception'', as it enables to integrate the knowledge gathered by other theories and it is ready to absorb new findings.
Relationship between Cloniger's temperamental dimensions and the 41 patients with diagnosis ICD10 F31.3-5 responses to tricyclic antidepressants treatment was investigated using the CGI, HAMD, BPRS, and MADRS value changes measured weekly during one month period. An index utilized as the classification variable, based on regression analysis results where dependent variable was average score of global improvement and independent variables were 11 subscales of Cloninger's Threedimensional personality questionnaire, was defined by equation I = 2*RD3 (attachable) + NS1 (excitable). On the basis of the index the patients were divided into three groups (high, medium, and low index value). Relation between the index and the patients responses to the treatment were studied using ANOVA with repeated measurements. Statistically significant differences in the treatment responses pattern were found on global improvement scale, anxiety-depression syndrome, gravity of disease, and the MADRS total score. The interaction of groups and time of the remaining scales were in the same direction but not statistically significant. Findings indicated that individuals with higher sensitivity to noradrenalin and low basic dopaminergic activity might improve during the first three weeks of hospitalization faster.
In the last several decades, psychology of health has been formed into a relatively independent branch of science. It includes psychological studies dealing both with mastering difficult health situations (the so called coping), and with influencing undersirable activities (e.g., type of smoking), and strengthening/supporting those forms of behaviour that have got positive significance from the viewpoint of health. The article presents a summary of 9 most important theoretical conceptions in the above mentioned sphere of psychology of health: Lazarus' model of coping with stress, theory of reasoned action, theory of planned behaviour, protection motivation theory, social/cognitive approach to the problems of healthy way of life (health belief model), theory of reliance upon individual ability of coping with health problems (self-efficacy theory), precaution adoption process model, Limburg and Berlin model. In the conclusion, the most important moments of motivation and realization phases of given behaviour are mentioned.
The set of 214 ambulant epileptics patients (116 men, 98 women), with mean age of 31.1 + 10.4 years, was examined by means of Wechsler Memory Scale, Form I., and by means of intellect scale (Wechsler-Bellevue). The study analyses mainly the psychometric data; special problems of epilepsy will be dealt with in another work concerned with this set. The development of WMS and its modifications is described. Critical notes on the existing usage of WMS in Czechoslovakia are given. Correlations among the WMS subtests show that all of these subtests have got their value. There exist relatively high correlations between memory and intellect performance for the whole set correlation between FSIQ and MQ is 0.74, between VIQ and MQ 0.72, and for PIQ and MQ 0.63). Some significant differences between the results in male patients and female patients have again pointed out the fact that the results of both sexes in neuropsychological tests often cannot be intermingled without differentiation. The frequencies of FSIQ-MQ differences are tabelled in absolute values. At summing up positive and negative differentiations, x = 9.6, s = 7.3, median = 7, range being somewhere between -20 and +37. In 168 patients, i. e., in 79.2 %, FSIQ was higher than MQ; in 37 subjects, i. e., in 17.5 %, FSIQ was lower than MQ: in 7 subjects the difference was null. The standardization of Wechsler Memory Scale-Revised (Wechsler, 1987) for the population of CSFR and in relation to WAIS-R is recommended.
In the framework of preventive care, the problem of neuro-psychic load comes to the fore. It comes out that the research in this sphere should be interdisciplinary, aimed at finding out the causes of the rise, and at the assessment of forms and effects of the load. Originally, three isolated theoretical approaches (biochemical, psychological and physiological) have been framed, all of them being focused on the study of the load. Gradually, it has turned up that the concept of stress cannot be entirely generalized; different opinions concerning both the understanding of the basic concept and theoretical orientations have arisen. Methodological approaches that had been formed within the above-mentioned conceptions have stayed till the present day. The conceptions of the neuro-psychic load research, however, are already worked in the interdisciplinary way. Narrow definitions of the load, as well as narrow classical theories in this respect are considered irrelevant. In the process of the human performance assessment, a more systemic approach is asked for. Research of this type issues from the demand for reliable performance; psychologically oriented research is concentrated namely at the optimization of the neuro-psychic load. This trend includes an important aspect within the preventive medical, as well as the psychological approach, i. e., the protection of the worker, respecting his/her work and life conditions. The selection of sensitive and reliable, especially psychological, psychophysiological and other methods, is one of the important factors of the neuro-psychic load research.
The study sums up some theoretical approaches and experimental results of the decision-making and problem-solving processes, and mental models in operator. Mutual relations of these processes, as well as trends of research in the given sphere are described and reffered to. Fast development of information technologies asks for solving the problem of compatibility of human decision-making strategy with the results of computer data processing. Terminological and conceptional confusion of the problem results from its marked interdisciplinary position. The key roe of psychology is played by theoretical and practical working out of the internal representation of problem-solving situations and function of mental models. The problem-solving can be understood as reception of non-standard decisions. Research in real situations with higher ecological validity becomes actual.
The authors present results of the research in some charactaristics of sexual behaviour of Czech boys and girls aged from 12 to 18 years. By means of personal interview a representative set of 1011 pupils from basic schools, training institutions, technical colleges and secondary schools was examined. It was found that before 18 years of age up to 75 % of respondents has got a sexual experience. A disturbing fact is that even though Czech boys and especially girls give higher number of sexual partners than their equals in age in West European countries and in the U.S.A. (34 % of girls and 37 % of boys had 4 and more partners), the frequency of using condom is substantially lower (only less then 10 % of the sample use is regularly). What concerns the knowledge about the ways of transferring the HIV virus, many inadequate ideas about possible contagion survive, as well as there are many threatening ignorances surviving in younger boys and girls. The results show that the characteristics of sexual behaviour found represent a real threat for a substantial part of adolescents in the future.
The advantages of cognitive styles as invariants affecting personality and cognition in a common index as well as objections to the validity of the cognitive styles' current measures prompted the study of the Pettigrew method - The category width (C-W). We adapted and evaluated the scale using a sample of university students majoring in various subjects n=284 and employed adults n=49. The results confirmed the consistency in the strategy of information processing with estimating high and low values which confirmed the thesis of the category width as a personality invariant. The width of ,,cognitive risk'' measured by the C-W scale is positively connected also with the tendency to take risks in social situations. Compared to the classic cognitive measures it also expresses wider personality dimensions which are reflected in solving social situations. Our groups showed the greatest tendency to take risks in situations which have a short term effect and vice versa; in situations with possible long term serious consequences the willingness to risk is smaller. The presumed differences, given by age, showing decreasing risk tendencies with age were confirmed. Higher age is connected with a more realistic judgement. Compared to American data we did not determine intersexual differences which we think are due to different social practices in the compared cultures. Relationships to the measures of creativity levels - flexibility and originality were not confirmed; however, these results cannot be generalized on account of the size of the research samples. In general, the C-W method enriches the arsenal of methods by the indicator of a strategy for various information processing and enhances the measures of risk tendencies in the social area. The individual differences in the category width indicate the possibility of measuring the tolerance level when solving social situations.
The article sums up knowledge from the most popular digests and critical studies on methods of evaluating the behaviour of new-born children. It also refers to the approaches suggested by authors of some original works that influenced the development of methods and approaches to the evaluation of new-born children behaviour in general. It gives basic information on the contents, psychometry, and methodology of the most important and best-known methods. It follows up the historical line of the development of approach to methods. Since the twenties, when the wave of interest in the behaviour of new-born children started, we can differentiate several approaches. First, the medical approach, called forth by the effort to the earliest and most precise diagnosis of especially pathological functions of the brain, so that suitable therapy and habilitation (rehabilitation) of the new-born child could start. This trend issued first from reflexology and resulted in contemporary neurological tests. The psychological approach, stimulated by the development of behaviourism, appeared around the fifties. At the beginning, it followed the same aim as the medical approach, but gradually it concentrated mainly on finding out interindividual differences inside in advance defined populations of healthy new-born children, sometimes also inside the population of risky and pathological new-born children. The interdisciplinary approach links up medical and psychological starting points. It contributes to the improvement of timely diagnostics of new-born children, as well as to the precision of interindividual differences and to further enrichment of knowledge about new-born children. At the same time, however, it has brought in new, hitherto unknown methodological problems. It is evident that it is not sufficient to evaluate achievements, attained in individual items of these methods; it is also necessary to evaluate the patterns of the new-born children behaviour as a whole and take into consideration the situational context. These problems can be solved with the aid of methods evaluating the early interaction between mother and new-born-child, or parents and new-born child, using the interaction approach. A further possible solution is pointed out by Prechtl: for evaluating the behaviour of. new-born children, the ethological approach and ethograms can be also used. Both these approaches must be considered simultaneously with the medical and psychological approaches (focused on new-born children only). At the general methodological level, therefore, the solution is represented by the holistic approach. In conclusion of the study it is stated that in the sphere of care for new-born children in common Czechoslovak practice the possibilities of evaluating the new-born children behaviour by means of methods issuing from the medical approach are used. Methods issuing from the psychological approach are not used in practice. The psychological care for new-born children is missing, sufficient attention is not paid to the basic as well as applied research into the new-born children behaviour.
The American ego-psychology after the war is connected first of all with the work of Heinz Hartmann. Hartmann reassumed the Freud's ego-psychology that since the beginning of twenties took always more important place in psychoanalysis. In 1939, Hartmann published the revolutionary essay Ego-psychology and the problem of adaptation, where he outlined a number of regulative functions of ego and he defined so-called conflict-free ego sphere, within its border the normal development of perceiving, thinking, mastering of motorics etc. takes place. Through that, the psychoanalysis got into the close touch with the normal psychology, especially with the developmental, experimental and cognitive psychology. Without the knowledge of this basic Hartmann's work, it is not possible to understand the modern psychoanalysis, especially those trends which come from the U. S. A. to Europe. The author gives the overlook of ego-psychology of S. Freud and he reviews and evaluates in detail the basic Hartmann's essay from 1939, the work not very known to our professional public.
The paper provides the most recent studies of aggressive behavior in children, faced in the sociocognitive shere. Using Dodge's (1990) social information processing model of the 5 steps, it is shown, that aggressive children experience problems on each step of the model. The paper indicates a summary of the deficits of aggressive children, which leads to understanding of chronic aggressive behavior disorders in children and to promising interventions. The results support the fact, that rejected aggressive children are in a big psychological risk and this subtype of aggression must be modificated first.
The study defines activities in mental hospital practice that are performed without the assent of the mentally sick individuals. It gives a survey of legislative rules for these situations and of problems that occur in daily psychiatric practice. Contraposed are the rights of the patients, namely of the mentally sick, that are often the object of discussion and that even in our country need to be established in the legislation as well as in the ethical health principles.
Our study was aimed at the analysis of the self-evaluation components and their relation to personality. The research was performed in a group of university students (N=188, including 72 boys and 116 girls). In order to follow the level of personality traits we used the Personality Questionnaire of Eysenck, for assessment of Interpersonal personality traits the Leary's ICL. For the study of self-esteem, the Rosenberg's scale of self-esteem was used. On the basis of our results, it is possible to consider two or three components of self-evaluation. We think a three-factor model of the structure to be the most suitable one both from the theoretical and practical points of view. It marks off two components of self-evaluation that depend on the temperament, or on emotional character, and one component (the third one) independent of them that is based on social comparison.
The presented study deals with several pieces of knowledge concerned with the psychology of pain. A brief review of basic methods of its relief and removal is given. The article sums up basic information about the field research into the influence of pain on mind and behaviour of patients of general physician. The research has resulted in finding that pain is more easily overcome by dominant people, who are innerly stable and firmly anchored in the family. A longlasting inactivity turned out to be a negative factor in bearing pain.
The article gives a brief outline of the views of different authors on coping mechanisms and approaches to the indentification of these mechanisms. Furthermore, the article deals with the definitions and categorization of coping strategies and describes Edwards' normative and descriptive model of choosing a coping strategy. Reliable methods or measures with exactly determined psychometric characteristics are of great significance to the study of coping. The approaches of the authors cited to solving this problem are not identical and they often criticize one another. As a result, there are many methodological questions in the study of coping and stress which have yet to be solved. in this study, the author tried to give an overview of the most important opinions or suggestions in solving methodological problems in the study of stress coping.
The author analyzes the unconscious motives for emigration, grouping them into three categories: separation from parents, identification with parents, and fantasy of paradise lost. Her thesis is that in the case of a highly conflictual and ambivalent separation from parents, leaving for another country can become a way of illusory achievement of separation and differentiation. Examples of leaving as an unconscious expression of distancing, abandoning, and vengeance on parents is illustrated by a clinical case. Motives for emigration related to identification with parents' attachments, values and ideals are illustrated by the author's analysis of her own experience. Her desire for emigration grew out of early identification with both parents, reinforced by the traumatic experience of growing up in an oppressive political regime. She identified with both parents' mourining of their pasts, their memories, losses, and their deep longing to leave and return to people and places they loved and left. In the last category, it is suggested that longing for a lost paradise (a happy childhood where all needs are fulfilled) as well as wishing to find what was lost, or never had been, can be easily be projected into new places and situations. Such unconscious fantasies can, however, be connected with more realistic motives and conscious goals. Immigrants from Eastern Europe and the So viet Union, in wanting to leave their oppressive regimes, often saw the Western world as opposite to their own-a magic world of freedom and unlimited possibility. Limited information and isolation only increased their idealization and fantasy projections. In conclusion, the author defines emigration as a traumatic process which involves massive losses, threatening an emigrant's identity, and causing regression. She differentiates states of mourning,and nostalgia in the emigrant's experience. Grieving promotes a realistic view and integration of the past, as well as interpersonal growth, but nostalgia (including denial of loss), as a defensive connection to the idealized past blocks adjustment and change.
In a group of 128 students (men of technical schools), we studied the stability of negative and positive components of anxiety state/trait that were separated in the preceding research (the names of the components were chosen according to the terminology used at the research of mood, while both components were scored for anxiety). In keeping with our assumption, the stability of the trait of anxiety components is higher than the stability of anxiety state. The stability of positive and negative components of anxiety is different. The positive component of trait anxiety is more stable than its negative component. On the other hand, the level of anxiety feelings is more stable than the level of the satisfaction and good mood feelings. Different stability and different relations of positive and negative components of anxiety towards other variables result in the authors' conclusion that it would be suitable to measure both of the above mentioned components separately.
The study sums up those psychological and social/psychological theories that are systematicly concerned with identity. It introduces briefly a survey of opinions supported by prominent representatives of the theory of ego-identity formation, of the theory of identity in the symbolic interaction theory, of the theory of social identity in psychology of intergroup behaviour and intergroup relations, of identity in the approach of social construction theory and integrating theories of identity. The above mentioned theories issue from different theoretical background; they use different terminology, assigning different meanings to identical terms; they differ what concerns the depth of working out the terms and their mutual relations; it is difficult, therefore, to compare and evaluate them mutually. In spite of this, they are still used in professional literature, being vivid, inspiring, complemented and enriched; they prove the contribution of psychology to working out an interdisciplinary problem, such as the identity undoubtedly is.
The author characterizes in brief the nonverbal communication; she analyses the approach to the study of nonverbal communication and introduces different kinds of nonverbal manifestations. Further on, she is concerned with the problem of nonverbal keys, characterized as ''building stones'' of the nonverbal communication that provide information about both emotions and interpersonal relations. She introduces three levels of nonverbal keys that can be interpreted as ambiguous, unambiguously correct, and ambiguously incorrect. At the same time, the author classifies the nonverbal keys according to Krivohlavy. Special attention is paid to the posturology: its definition, as well as the methods of its work (drawbacks included) are presented.
Four groups of persons growing up in a nonstandard psyche-social environment during their childhood are followed up in a long term study. These children lived in children's homes, in the individual foster-parent care, in SOS children villages, the fourth group was formed by children born after the demonstrable unwanted pregnancy. The fifth group is the control group to the ''unwanted'' children. This group represents the approximate social norm for contemporary times. The study consists of three parts. This first part is concerning the group of 56 children growing up in children's homes since the early childhood till the completing the compulsory education, who have already reached the middle adult age now. The findings support the conception of the relation between the deprivational situation of the child and the later development of his/her personality. The followed up group deviates in the unfavourable direction in the common indicators of social integration and social successfulness. However, the outstanding differentiation of the influence of living conditions during the childhood according to the gender of persons followed up was found. Even the ability of social communication with the neighbourhood appears as a differentiating factor. The acceptance or refusing of taking part in the research of this type becomes in a certain way one of the tests of social competence of persons followed up.
Current approaches to erroneousness in syllogistic reasoning are presented. Following introductory knowledge of logics about syllogistic reasoning, various aspects of failure, mainly inconsistent use of the method of formal logics and the effect of beliefs are discussed. Details are given about the ways in which beliefs influence reasoning and about relevant theoretic explanations (e.g., conversion, selective choosing, mental models). The elimination of bias in reasoning by means of instruction was studied, too. The conclusion evaluates the overall situation in this field.
The study represents the memory test of verbal learning (Auditory-Verbal Learning Test, CVLT, more recently AVLT), adjusted into the Czech language. The author compares different foreign experimental data about the test, and presents his own experience. By means of this test, a set of secondary school pupils was examined (N = 14); the results justify the adequacy of the original norms by Rey (1958). The use of delayed test after the interference and of delayed test after a longer period represents a contribution to the memory assessment.
The study is devoted to issues of perception of aggression in interpersonal interaction in relation to some relevant behavioral strategies in this context. 136 students of grammar school (66 girls, 70 boys, mean age = 15.6 y.) rated situation of interpersonal aggression on 14 bipolar rating scales and then described the frequency of use of 30 behavioral variants which represented three strategies of aggressive behavior (namely direct physical and verbal and covert aggression) and strategy of withdrawing behavior. Factor analysis verified expected structure of perception of aggressive interaction. Three factors were found out, namely emotional evaluation, involvement and self-confidence. Similarly, results of factor analysis also sustained the above mentioned structure of behavioral routines. Regarding the relation between aggression evaluation and behavioral strategies, the results of multiple regression indicate that both less negative emotional experiencing of interpersonal aggression and strong degree of involvement emphasize aggressive behavior, whereas this is independent on self-confidence. Other findings regarding connection perception and concrete types of behavior, and sex differences are discussed.
In experimental class for talented children (N = 17), the level of creative capacities was studied. The study concerned children aged from 5.6 to 6.5 years passing the first year of compulsory education but learning the subject matter of the second and third grades of the basic school. In order to compare the level of creative thinking, there was a group of children: one class of the Ist grade (N = 24), one of the 2nd grade (N = 23), and one of the 3rd grade (N = 23). The results obtained by Torrance Figure Test of creative thinking have shown that the output of talented children in the factors of fluency and flexibility was approximately on the level of children from a common first grade class. Concerning the factor of originality, children from the experimental class had a slightly better output than those from the second grade of the basic school; in the average, they approximate by the level of output to the pupils from the second class (differences were not statistically significant). Further on, it was found: (1) different results in Urban's test of creative thinking, (2) differences concerning the level of creative thinking in talented children as compared with other groups of children (they were highly significant), (3) the relation between creative and intellectual capacities was validated neither by Torrance's, nor by Urban's tests because of low number of the subjects examined. It can be summed up that Urban's test is a newer one, a more complex, more original and objective one, because - as opposed to the three factors of the Torrance's test - it examines even 11 factors of creative capacities. At examining talented children, it has enabled a more exact registration of the capacity of an entire, more mature, and more complex viewing of the world in the talented children as compared with average children, even with the older ones.
The theory of neural networks is a model of information compilation inferred from biological nervous system and cells. The nervous system and cells are simulated by mathematical functions implemented in traditional and in neural computers. The basics of the theory were developed in the 50th, asserting in the 90th. In this article, the human selective attention is being discussed from the point of view of neurophysiology, psychology and artificial neural networks. The report is a nontechnical introductory article.
The author is concerned with the problem of self-control and its influence on performances. He gives a brief survey of the existing research in this topic: both abroad and in the Czechoslovak psychology. He was interested in the question if the subject can improve his self-control by means of the attention concentration training. In the next part of the study, the reader is informed about an experiment that was carried out in accordance with principles of intensive research strategy. The researcher worked with two groups of pupils from the last grade of the basic school. All pupils had troubles with the attention concentration during the schoool activity. At applying the non-traditional method of longitudinal training of concentration, interesting results have been achieved. The research is, of course, limited in its generalization due to relatively small samples of subjects. But it has shown that the problems in question are resolvable when using suitable training methods. The results obtained might be exploited in the following research, or in practice, e.g. in pedagogical/psychological advice centers.
The study gives a resume about the development of studying the psychological consequences of unemployment from the great economic crisis (in the thirties) to the present knowledge coming from the developed countries of Europe and the U.S.A. The results that were analysed had used the knowledge of psychology from the sphere of the psychology of personality, psychology of development, social psychology and motivation of human behaviour. Changes in the organization of the unemployment research were conditioned by the variability of several factors, namely of the time of unemployment, age, sex, social class, bias for work, financial straits, experience from the previous employment, emotional and social support, as well as individual's inner resources. From the viewpoint of the methods that were used, the studies of M. Jahoda seem to be inspiring until today. The previous as well as the present researches into unemployment show at the same time that a long-lasting loss of work has got negative consequences for human in the sphere of both mental and physical health. The present direction of the research into psychological consequences of unemployment includes the demand for depth analyses of social environment, different physiological measurements, study of the protecting influence of emotional and social support, as well as personal activity (personal competence) of an individual. Theoretical reflections related to the problem of work, employment and unemployment confirm both the importance of interindividual differences and the importance of the environment and its role in mental health of individual.
Every year, 144 children of the age from 2 to 16 years (i.e., each child 14 times altogether) were examined by different tests of intelligence (by turns: TM, PDW, Raven, WB, IST-Amthauer). On the basis of the results obtained, a correlation matrix was constructed that provides an idea how much and at what age each of the methods correlates both with the age and the method. The tables for the prognosis for particular ages at using particular methods are introduced in detail, and that for the need of both clinical and school psychologists. The predictive validity of particular methods is expressed numerically in tables, and it increases, of course, with the age.
The article critically reviews models of smoking: the Social Learning and the Nicotine Addiction Model, the Opponent Process Theory, and the Transactional Analysis (TA) Theory. The first three models have one common shortcoming - they do not explain why people start smoking and why they are doing something that harms them. The TA supposes people are sticked to their destructive scripts. Further shortcoming: The Social Learning Model lacks physiological mechanisms, the Nicotine Addiction Model explains why people continue smoking but has no psychological or social psychological concepts which could be helpful in preventing and quitting smoking, the Opponent Process Theory supposes a substance of pleasure but there is no such experience with the very first cigarette. At the moment, the most promising theory seems to be the transactional one. The model says that people start doing harmful things because of their destructive script. A script is an unconscious life plan, a premature emotional decision which people forgot and which continues influencing them in their adult life. The disadvantage of this model is its unphysiological character though the theory itself does have concepts related to physiology, e.g. psychological organs (archeopsyche, exopsyche and neopsyche), and the concept somatic Child (the state of self at the time of birth). From the viewpoint of this theory, the beginning of smoking could be caused by the following factors: (1) upbringing of children 1.1 to destructive scripts, 1.2 to a negative attitude to themselves (life position: I-You+), 1.3 with script injunctions like ''Do not exist!'', ''Do not think!'', ''Do not feel!'', ''Harm yourself!'', ''Do not be happy!'', etc., 1.4 to script convictions (combinations of prejudice and self-delusion) like ''The harmfulness of smoking has not been proved yet.'' and ''Nothing can ever happen to Me.'', 1.5 to a script mission ''You'll be grown up when you will be like us.''; (2) immediate circumstances like 2.1 counterinjunctions ''Be adult!'', ''Impress!'', ''Be strong!'', 2.2 the state of self called natural Child, 2.3 discounting of negative feelings (uneasiness, etc.), 2.4 attributions during the very first cigarette ''I am grown up.'', ''I am not a child.'', 2.5 impulses like ''Be always in hurry!'', ''Be always like the others!''; (3) smoking is probably built into some scripts like the almost-script, the joyless script and the mindless script, and participates in counterscripts like ''In order to be accepted I have to surrender my feelings and needs.'' The practical prevention strategies of smoking are better developed than the theories of smoking. Nevertheless, we can improve these strategies if we improve the theory or if we take a better theory as a base. The transactional analysis theory seems to be such a theory.
In the course of investigating groups of pupils (n = 84, average age 13.5 y.), secondary school students (n = 145, average age 17.1 y.), and Technical University students (n = 75, average age 22.5 y.), we studied some biorhytmical relations of sleep habitudes and preferred time of activity. From among the most important findings, let us mention the statistically significant correlations between the feeling of fatigue during the first hour of instruction (in 13.5 y.o. pupils) and the results, r = .163, p = .022, i.e., between the time of real sleep and the school achievements, r = -.318, p < 0.01 (in secondary school students). The generally assumed shorter time of necessary sleep in case of the ''morning type'' was found only in the group of the secondary school students, though generally the shift to the extreme position of ''morningness'' (''earliness'') is linked up with the need of shorter sleep. When applying the criterion of morning (R) and evening (V) types, we found significant differences in time of falling into sleep (V-type needs more time); the R-type has got a significantly more regular sleep regime than the V-type; in case of forgetting the subject matter in relation to the time of learning, the R-type forgets significantly sooner if he/she learns in later hours of the day. The V-type forgets more, if he/she prepares himself/herself in the morning or during the day. The results of the investigation are discussed in relation to the school ergonomy that supports the maturity of the student at his/her simultaneous minimum inadaptation (maladaptation).
The study presents informative summary of research conception of the assignment solved by the author in the framework of the grant ''Psychology of the Suicide''. The suggested conception follows from the assumption of the so-called balance suicide, i. e., of the autodestructive act carried out by a person essentially less normal on the basis of rational consideration as a balance of his/her life. The most suitable object for the psychological research into suicide seems to be longitudinal, presuicidal development with a structured suicidal motivation, as found just in the case of the balance suicide. The central importance in the suicidal development is given to the structure of motivation, and - in its framework-to the mechanism of evaluation (self-evaluation). As a research means for the suicidal motivation study, the author chose the method of comparative analysis of biographical material (especially diaries) and artistic, if need be philosophical works of creative personalities with suicidal tendencies. The methodology should cover the personality presuicidal development of the suicide, the materialization. of his//her inner experience in the artistic or philosophical work included. It is a non-traditional modification of biographical and pathographic approaches. Methodology will be applied to the analysis of concrete creative personalities with suicidal tendencies, especially to the case of Ladislav Klima (1878 - 1928), writer and philosopher, and other artists-suicides (H. Kleist, J. London, Kl. Mann, E. Heminqway, C. Paves). The comprehensive aim of the research project is to work out the psychological conception of suicide of the so-called balance type, and to verify possibilities of psychological research into suicidal motivation by means of comparative analysis of ''life and work'' of a creative personality with suicidal tendencies.
In a gallery of the great spiritual figures of the 20th century personality of V. E. Frankl shows very precious and respectable unity of life story and theoretical endeavour. A crucial and constitutive experience of the stay in concentration camp has influenced Frankl's basic orientation towards meaning of human life in its genuine conrete temporal form as well as in its global eschatological religious perspective. Just by this orientation Frankl has become a principle opponent of reductionism which represents in his understanding a disguise of nihilism. Frankl's authentically broad-minded comprehesion of category of meaninggoes by its roots to Plate's idea of the Good, to the Old Testament ethos of personal response to transcendent challenge and to conception of LOGOS in the New Testament. If the actual historical course of the 20th century proved in many phenomena a validity of Nietzsche's prophecy of the advent of nihilism then the life work of V. E. Frankl has brought a persuasive and deeply encouraging alternative.
On the ground of the interpersonal hypothesis of music, tested 1964, 1965 and 1968 by F. Knobloch, the psychiatrist and psychotherapist, and his group, and more than 20 years lasted analytical musicological work, the new verifying was performed by using the GUHA (= General Unary Hypothesis Automaton) method. On the work of B. Bartok has been shown that different groups of respondents are able to testify the morphological differences. The elaboration by GUHA method confirmed the presuppositions from the year 1975, as well as the the original assumptions of the interpersonal hypothesis of music from the year 1964.
The importance of psychophysiology has increased in recent years, especially because of the fact that it has become a connecting link that can make the relations between psychosocial and vegetative spheres clear. The inferring of mental activity by means of physiological indices is, however, connected with a number of methodological problems. Above all, opinions on the denouncing value of physiological indices, and by that also on the applicability of psychophysiology, namely in clinical practice, differ. In spite of these problems, the authors consider the psychophysiological approach in psychodiagnostics and psychotherapy of mainly psychosomatic patients for appropriate and contributing. The proceeding itself is presented in the case study.
Many authors have been concerned with the research into the structure of feature anxiety; they have defined both the in the contents differentiated facets of the anxiety state according to the situations that provoke anxiety, and the structural components within a situationally unconditioned feature of anxiety. We analyzed the structure of trait anxiety and that of the anxiety state with the aid of STAI questionnaire in 128 men - technical branch undergraduates; we focused our study at the relation between the components and the temperament. Both trait anxiety and anxiety state are two-dimensional; in both cases, we isolated negative and positive factors, i.e., the factor of negative mood, or tendency to experience anxiety, the factor of positive mood, i.e., tendency to experience it. The above mentioned factors are mutually independent. The factor of negative mood is influenced by neuroticism, while the the factor of positive mood is independent of the temperament. Tendency to experience states of anxiety depends both on neuroticism and extraversion, while tendency to experience positive states does not depend on the temperament.
The influence of the reaction of an unexpected accident victimizer on the critical event on the evaluation of his/her conduct in the incident from the viewpoint of the victim was experimentally studied. We assumed that the new step of interaction (reaction of the victimizer on the incident) would influence the interpretation of the immediately preceding action (critical event). This assumption is contiguous to the thesis that any concrete interpersonal act is intepreted in the context of the whole interaction sequence. 400 partipipants (subjects) took part in the experiment 4 x 2 (factors: reaction of the victimizer after the incident, sex); from the position of victim they evaluated the conduct of the victimizer in a short story describing an unexpected accident. Participants were to imagine that the described event happened to them. Four experimental conditions in a between subject project differentiated in the fact that after an identical description of the critical event a description of different reactions of the victimizer followed: apologize, unconcern, assertive transfer of the responsibility on the victim, and a hostile accusation of the victim. The victimizer's reaction strongly influenced the evaluation of his/her conduct in the critical event as hostile, aggressive, ruthless, purposeful, sanctionable, breaking norms, and unjustified. The most positively evaluated conduct was the conduct of an accident victimizer who apologized, confessed his guilt and promised help. The consecutive hostile conduct of the victimizer was evaluated in the most negative way.
The study is concerned with the life--span developmental psychology and the subsequent biodromal psychology. It introduces elements of the life-span understanding of the development, among which especially multidimensionality, plurality, variability and change of researched units, into which the whole life course of human turns, are included. The ontogenetic development in the sense of growing, stability, and declination is substituted by the concept of gains and losses in the development. Conceptions of the life-span developmental psychology are expressed in 11 items. In the concluding part of the study, specific applications of the life--span developmental psychology are searched for. From the life-span point of view, the problem of socialization seems to be different, since in advanced age the trend to individualization becomes dominant. Further on, the study is concerned with the life-span developmental psychology and psychological defences, psychotherapy, and psychological counselling.
The article informs about contemporary approaches of selected authors towards the problem that falls within the term of maltreatment of children and adolescents in family and about its analysis and definition. It points out the facts that - in the present time - influence negatively a more precise definition of terms such as psychological maltreatment, physical maltreatment, sexual abuse, and neglect of children by parents. It also calls attention to selected theories and models of rise and effect of some of these socially pathological phenomena. It pays attention to potential consequences of maltreatment of children in family in the sphere of delinquency.
We begin with the assumption of utility and usefulness of a normative and evaluative approach to the problems of functional as well as dysfunctional cohabitation in family and marriage. Analysis of the selected literature shows that certain evaluative and normative postulates, or at least their elements, can be implicite found even in the work of those authors who explicitly deny them. Evaluative approach can be deduced from abstract schemes or general moral postulates and codes - or from the empirical reality of family and marriages functioning. We rely on the latter approach. The author lists selected concepts and approaches to the problem of functioning family and marriage. He distinguishes among: concepts derived from psychoanalytical psychology and therapy; concepts derived from structural and strategic approaches (emphasizing systemic-interactional paradigm); and rational functional approach using terms such as false expectations, social learning, mutual behavioral exchange, etc. Even though the above-mentioned approaches in their radical formulations can be understood as contradictory and incompatible, the author is sympathizing with those who approach conceptions from synthetizing and integrating point of view. Such approach can be found in a number of models of family and marriage functioning and dysfunctions (Beaver's model, McMaster model, Riskin's hypothesis, the eclectic approach of D. E. Mead, etc.). Based on currently available experience and knowledge, the author offers an attempt at a synthesis. Family, taken from the point of view of its functioning, can be understood as a structured whole (system) whose meaning, purpose and goals is to develop a relatively safe and stable space (environment) for sharing, reproduction and production of human life. Cohabitation in the family and marriage can be characterized by these concepts: structure and organization of family, its dynamics (including developmental approach), intimity, personal autonomy, and value orientation. All these components and processes are realized (developed as well as fulfilled) by means of interaction and communication processes. The author is analyzing the six listed components and processes. He demonstrates their content as well as basic characteristics from the perspective of a family and marriage functioning and dysfunctioning. Their mutual interrelations are stressed together with connections and balances among components and processes as well as with the goals of family and marriage in their developmental stages. In closing the author suggests some possible diagnostic and therapeutic consequences of the presented approach.
The study is concerned with the general problem of applying the hermeneutic approach to psychology. It issues from the criticism of the monopoly of natural sciences' methodology, as well as from its expansion into the so called human sciences. As a matter of fact, it relates to the scientism in social psychology, and in the so called behavioural sciences; it also raises objections against the learning of psychoanalysts. Psychology, orientated to natural sciences, is manipulative. As an alternative, the author offers daseinsanalytically phenomenological approach based on the hermeneutics of human existence, the starting point being natural experience in natural world (''life-world''). The hermeneutic approach, however, does not stop at the description of the so called contents of emotional experience, but it performs the explanation of the hidden existential coincidences. Natural historically causal interpretations are substituted with explanation aiming at the understanding of sense and meanings. Specific attention is paid to the differentiation between interpretation and hermeneutic explanation. While interpretation works with the systems of artificial term constructs, hermeneutics operates in the field of unmediated given facts, i.e., in the field of human existence phenomena. With the aid of such hermeneutics, the review of sciences about human can be developed. In cass of psychology, ''hermeneutic psychology'' is concerned. The purpose of this ''new science'' is to modernize (actualize) the authentic human dimension.
The authoress differentiates direct and mediated approaches to the psychological examination of concrete personality. She also differentiates two sources of personality data, i. e. test methods and the context of factual life of the subject under study. One of the mediated examination methods, when data are obtained from the context of the individual's life, is the psychological analysis of personal documents. The authoress has used it in this case with regard to the personality of T. G. Masaryk, and that in the range of three themes: primordial (original) family environment, emotionality, traits of temperament and character. The data material to the first theme indicates the absence of preconditions for the development of the so called deprivation syndrome in Masaryk's primordial family environment. The data about emotionality could have been itemized into the following sections: emotional sensitiveness, control of the manifestations of emotions, emotional part of the relations towards people, basic humour. The first two sections were interpreted with regard to the psycho-aesthetic proportion of emotionality in terms of E. Kretschmer; the third section was evaluated as social empathy; the fourth one as positive basic humour. The data about traits of temperament and character were classified according to the semantically psychological points of view. In the concluded individual structure, the characteristic of assertive power - strength dominates, followed by social empathy, personal authenticity, distance in social contacts, moral imperative, etc. The structures cannot be interpreted with regard to any of the known personality theories; it is interesting, however, from the heuristic point of view. The way of using the method of analysing personal documents that was applied - and, in fact, suggested - by the authoress in this case, is characterized by interpretations of whole groups of data and by their alternative confrontations with professional concepts or theories of the psychology of personality. The method revokes the former concept of understanding psychology, of course, with the meaning that corresponds to the present state of psychological sciences.
In the experiment, the influence of position (actor, victim), gender of the actor, gender of the victim, and gender of the person taking part in the research, on the interpretation of an accidental event (evaluation of the critical act, general evaluation of the situation, anticipation of the situation course) was studied. Accidental interpersonal aggression was taken from the school environment - accidental injury of school-mate after collision. The data obtained indicated that in the process of interpreting accidental event from the position of the actor and the victim there exist differences analogous to the well-known differences in the interpretation of aggression. Certain differences showed in the viewpoint of boys and girls. Interpretation of actions was also influenced - to a certain extent - by the fact whether the actor was boy or girl, as well as whether the victim was boy or girl. The results are interpreted from the viewpoint of interaction understanding of interpersonal accidental events, and from the viewpoint of gender-role specificies.
The article recapitulates briefly the way of the elaboration of Czech norms of free word paired associations and some results of this research related to the word material of the association test (the word type of stimuli, the frequence of the stimulative words in Czech language), to the specific manipulations with the association test (the repetition, the change of the succession of items) and to the composition of the sample (sex, education). The results are interpretted partly on the level of the nominal association responses, partly on the level of syntactic relations of stimuli and responses and finally on the level of semantics connections of stimuli and responses, too. The author makes the use of these result contemporary and mentions briefly also the broader application possibilities of association methods, as they are applied abroad.
The authors point to the need for a scientific approach to the solution of serious social problems which follow social, economic, and political changes. The approach of policy science together with Bandura's theory of social learning is recommended as a theoretical framework for aimed interventions. The function of policy science is described in the context of liberal democracy and the significance of proximal and manipulable variables is stressed in the social learning model. Different types of intervention programs are presented together with possible problems that may occur. The scientific approach to solution of social problems is illustrated in five case studies of interventions in the United States (social skills training related to prevention of sexually transmitted diseases, life style modification focused on prevention of cardiovascular diseases, prevention of smoking addiction in adolescents, promoting employability in lower-income populations and improving work ethics by ''workplace literacy programs''). The study concludes by methodological observations concerning to ''policy science''.
Methodological viewpoints of Dilthey have been later on developed by phenomenologically oriented representatives of the characterology of the humanities. Themes like significance of behaviour of expression for the personality diagnostics, or concept of personality as of experiencing ''interior'' intermediately accessible by means of intuitive interhuman understanding have come to the fore. The third, more loosely linked up theme has also appeared; it is concerned with the criticism of neglecting regards towards experiencing as well as towards understanding in the theoretical/methodological conceptions of the personality problems research. In the sixties, the first two themes were treated mainly by A. Wellek; later on, at the end of eighties, by L.A. Radzichovskij; in the seventies and later, the second theme was also treated by several psychologists of religion. Attention to the third theme was paid - apart from Wellek in the sixties and seventies - namely by N. Sanford, S. Koch, and W. Revers. In the framework of the three above mentioned themes, certain linking up between the Dilthey's idea of understanding psychology and the modern postulate (Ch. Biihler, and others) of the regard towards ''human problems'' in the process of developing psychological sciences took place. Some viewpoints of this ''understanding'' psychology of personality are, no doubt, extreme and thus little acceptable, while others are - in the general context of methodological problems of psychology - still functional and useful.
The author analyzes her experience of emigration and adaptation in the United States. She describes her psychoanalytic training in the William Alanson White Institute in New York and her experience in treating patients from various ethnic backgrounds. She also discusses conditions and causes which made psychotherapy and psychoanalysis popular in the United States in the past as well as contemporary trends in the treatment of mental disorders, which restrict the influence of psychoanalysis and which are directed against long-term psychotherapy.
The authors describe the results of a pilot study that represents a part of the Trail Making Test standardization in Czech children aged 9-14 years. The authors studied the healthy school children and compared them with American children (Reitan, 1971) and Spanish children (Leon-Carrion, 1989). The examining of 93 children (48 girls and 45 boys) has shown that the results are very close to the American ones and significantly better than the Spanish ones. The results of Czech children were (M = 13.3, SD = 4.6) in part A and (M = 28.1, SD = 11.3) in part B. Differences between boys and girls were not statistically significant, which corresponds to the previous findings. Correlation with age was 0.402 in part A, and 0.531 in part B. The authors assume a low cultural determination of the test, but they point out the correct administration of the test and the composition of the sample examined. They state that this test is contributing within clinical and pedagogical practice, in pharmacology and neuropsychology. The results support the utility of the test and of further home studies aimed at finding differences among healthy children, children with brain disfunctions and more serious damages of the brain, and the including of the test into a wider spectrum of psychological tests.
The study presents some basic principles of the developmental psychological theory of the French psychologist Henri Wallon (1879-1962). It tries to explicit his original theory of social essence of the individual expressed in the statement: ''the human being is social in a genetic sense''. The crucial orientation of the new born is a postural-expressive one. The relationship with his/her first significant persons can be characterized as ''interpellative'' necessitating interpretative processes and pointing out the uncompleteness and the social essence of the individual. In this way, the social orientation of the individual is primary, the other is more the mediator of the world than a social ''object''. Comparisons with the Lacan's psychoanalysis are done. The developmental stage oriented to objects and activities with them (centrifugal) comes only after and alternates with stages oriented ''inside'' filled with the work on the self (centripetal). The important role played in the construction of the individual's subjectivity is assigned to the instance of ''inner Other'' - result of the social life and of the clinical work on self. The inner Other is neither an arbitrary invention of the person, nor isn't it a mechanical interiorization of the other. Then, the Piaget's theory of continual filiation of the semiotic function is contrasted with the Wallon's claim about the discontinuity and the difference between the sensori-motor inteligence (intelligence of situation) and the discoursive intelligence rooted in representations. The Annexes complete the article giving the short biography of H. Wallon including the list of most important Wallon's writings.
When performing their profession, doctors and medical men are faced with the phenomenon of politically motivated hunger-strike of protest. A larger scope for their orientation and proceedings (operation) is provided by the Declaration on Hunger-strikes, passed by the World Medical Association at Malta in November, 1991. At actual decision making, it is necessary to take into account all biological, psychological, and social factors, both at providing help and at rationally, medically indicated termination of the hunger-strike.
The study deals with problems related to verbal communication formalizing, The author borrows from Gelepithis (1991) the term premise' representing knowledge, believes, expectations, and aspirations. The author assumes that mutual understanding between those who communicate is possible only to that extent, to which they share mutually comparable premises reflecting in themselves also the situational (momentary) context. Issuing from this assumption, the author points out at the limitations of formalizing: (a) potentially always different and - to certain extent - unique situational contexts necessary for derivation of the meanings of the communicated; (b) universal regulations whose representation would enable the system based on them at arbitrary theme and arbitrary situational context to modify its premises so that they would be comparable with premises of human communicating with it; The author issues from the interactional - interpretational approach implying that: (a) communication cannot be understood from the objectivist, detached view of the observer but only within the framework of active participation in it, (b) phenomena can be interpreted only on the basis of subjective existence in the world. The examination of communication strategies as certain kind of meta-knowledge that can change the meaning (and by means of it also the understanding of the communicated) is suggested as a bearing theoretical-methodological starting-point. When classifying their particular kinds, without claim to precise determination of using particular strategies given by momentary and to certain - greater or smaller - extent unique situational context, the qualitative analysis is considered as suitable. The author sees the using of formalisms adopted in the application sphere of artificial intelligence in the construction of computer interactive depth questionnaires that might represent - despite certain limitations - a qualitatively higher level of psychological diagnostics.
Existential analytic concepts of man's living in the world, of its disturbances and of its meaning-centered (logo-) therapy are outlined and explained. Man's spiritual openess toward exercising his freedom and responsibility in his pursuit of meaningful living through conscience-based realization of objective situational values is his main truly human cognitive as well as motivational characteristic. The fulfilment of this striving for meaningful purpose in life is independent of his outer limitations as well as of his apparent achievements, failures, or suffering. The noogenic sources in selected neurotic, psychosomatic, and psychotic disturbances are outlined and the main logodiagnostic and logotherapeutic approaches, utilizing the spiritual abilities of self-distancing and self-transcendence, to overcoming them are characterized.
Authors publish the results of investigation in the Bosnian town Mostar in autumn, 1994. In the course of clinical psychological and psychiatric practice in the eastern part of Mostar, research into posttraumatic stress reactions and depressiveness (hereafter PTSD) carried out by questionnaires took place. The Impact of Event Scale (IES, 1979) by Horowitz and the questionnaire of depressiveness were used in 50 children. The most frequent trauma was: to become a refugee; death or injury in family; to see death or injury of other persons; a stay in a concentration camp; to be tortured or to be present at torturing other persons; mother's depression or depressive reaction. The following symptoms occurred most frequently: depressive feelings, unusual quietness, flashbacks, sleep disorders, omnipresent anxiety, keeping of contact with other children or adults. In most of the families that were in contact with psychologist, more persons suffered from the symptoms of PTSD. These children have passed through a preceding screening examination performed by English pediatricians and were sent into psychological care on account of the striking character of behaviour and references of parents. The authors found general IES = 36.6, the subscales: intrusion = 16.3, and avoidance = 18.3. Correlation 0.422 with the questionnaire of depressiveness (Birleson, 1981) was found. There were not any marked relation between age and results in IES; this was in correspondence with the clinical experience. When compared with reference groups of adults (Horowitz, 1993), the sample was comparable with Israeli soldiers with PTSD and with women who survived the tornado. Higher values in IES were found when the results were compared with that of 600 children within the artetherapeutic programme; this is linked up with easier identification of child at pediatric examination and at school. The results show a marked impact of war on the child's experience and the necessity of psychotherapeutic intervention programmes.
Up to now, the ''Big Five'' approach to personality has been verified at several levels. The authors of this study are concerned with the intercultural comparison of the occurrence of five factors of the personality description in different languages, the ''Big Five'' in relation to other structural models and personality questionnaires, with the five-factor model application to practice and with its critics. Five factors, originally identified in English, are nowadays confirmed in Dutch, German, Italian, Russian and Chinese, and in the A'are and Orissa languages, too. Concerning Hungarian, Polish and Czech, the research has been already started. In the article, the authors compare briefly the ''Big Five'' with other structural models and present an attempt at integrating the dimensional model of personality description with the circular model. The five-factor structure of personality description is searched for among the items of the personality questionnaires. A questionnaire has been also constructed that measures the separate dimensions of the ''Big Five''. Recently, the ''Big Five'' approach is used even in the application spheres of psychology, e.g. in the work counselling, in clinical practice, in phorensic psychology. The critics is led not only by psychologists who do not share the conviction of the universal validity of the five factors; the ''Big Five'' followers have also got reserveations concerning the method of the factor analysis itself, the selection and taxonomy of the personality relevant terms, the number and interpretation of particular factors, as well as the theoretical starting-points.
Roger says: ''If I can provide a certain type of relationship, the other person will discover within himself the capacity to use that relationship for growth and change and personal development will occur.'' (C. R. Rogers, On Becoming a Person, 1961, p. 33) Almost every therapeutic orientation tries to help people feel more comfortable within themselves. Their behaviour changes in the direction of better adjustment. The client learns new aspects of himself, new ways of relating to others, new ways of behaving. But what really happens in successful therapy? What are the psychological processes by which change comes out? This study concentrates on the process of constructive personal change in Person-Centered Therapy (PCT). The author applies a Person-Centered Theory of the therapeutical process to enlight a process of client's constructive personal change during a therapeutical interview with an experienced person-centered therapist - Ch. Devonshire. As so it was a demonstration interview from the Person-Centered Training (nov. 1988, Tatranska Strba), it was concerned a typical sample of Person-Centered Therapy. The author uses the process scale by Rogers and Rablen (1958) to analyze the movement and the change within the client's personality during the interview. She shows how the change effects the client's feelings and personal meanings, ways of experiencing, level of inkongruence, communication of his self, way of constructing the experience, relating to the problem, and relating to others. The study should be considered a contribution to the enlightment of the process of constructive personal change in PCT and it shows that Rogers' statement is valid even for the short sample of PCT omited above.
Age trends (children 7-15) and sex differences in 10 scales of CAMI (Locus of Control), and Moral Maturity Scale (M1 = Heteronomy, M3 = Autonomy) described in our last studies led us to further interaction analyses. of these two, and of other contextual social measures. Groups of boys and girls, pupils of primary school classes 2-4, 4-6, 6-8, were compared by means of methods of multivariate analysis and cannonical correlation. The results revealed distinct age and sex patterns. We found: a) different hierarchies/structures in boys' and girls' attributions connected with moral maturity, and generally stronger cohesion of both main constructs in girls, and in older children of both sexes; b) the emergence of a high contextual significance of real school success (marks and teachers' ratings) in classes 4-6, especially among boys, and then its decrease; c) stronger association of moral maturity and social status among girls than among boys, and also here certain age variabilities. These and other results we obtained seem to prove theories of qualitative age changes in the patternings of dynamic and/or maturity variables in personality. At the same time they throw some doubts on the traded uniformity and regularity in growth and development trends of these variables.
The importance of implicit theories in the process of overcoming the narrowly oriented traditional conceptions of academic intelligence are discussed. Implicit theories contribute to a significant extent to the forming of reflexity, i.e., of the mental process that enables subjective representation of cognitive activity in the individual's survival. Implicit theories provide declarative knowledge about the substance, strategies and context coherence of intellectual activities. Contribution of explicit, as well as of implicit theories is discussed. Up to the present time, the research activities have been focused rather at the analysis of intelligence than of perceived attribute. The knowledge obtained in the research of intelligence was completed with experience obtained by means of the study of allied constructs of creativity and wisdom. The generally treated opinions about intelligence seem to be an important source of knowledge, too. Implicit theories can be significantly influenced also by the relevance towards certain culture. In the conclusion, the advantages as well as disadvantages of the explicit and implicit theories of intelligence are summed up. The contribution of the implicitly obtained knowledge for setting up the individual's reflexity with potential instrumental effect is pointed out. Further progress enabling the formation of ecologically more valid conceptions of intelligence depends on the combined effect of explicit as well as implicit theories.
Authors present theoretical approaches to the temperament in sucklings and new-born children on which the development of their questionnaire was based. Even for early age, temperament is understood as a psychological construct that can be observed in new-born children in the form of precursors at psychobiological level of behaviour in other patterns of behaviour than in adults. They assume that - if really temperament is being concerned - it will be possible to differentiate four classical types of temperament, or tendencies, to introversion or extroversion and to stability or lability, similarly to the case of adults. The questionnaire of temperament in newborn child (DNT) of the mother-report type was constructed in such a way that its items can describe not only problems, but also positive forms of the new-born child's behaviour with which mother can have experience. It was set up as a loose part of Prague Descriptive Method evaluating the behaviour of new-born children and it was evaluated together with it by repeated measurement. DNT has got 17 items, in detail verbalised five-point scale, and two dimensions: reactivity to the world and self-regulation; these are understood as first signs of extroversion or introversion, and stability or lability.
Practical intelligence concerns solving of complex everyday-life problems consisting of many variables. Especially procedural knowledge which accelerates the total process of problem solving and decision making together with declarative one are used in their processing. In research, we applied the paradigm based on comparison between experts and novices. The first experiment focuses on the comparison of objective and subjective characteristics of the problem solving process. The objective characteristics are the ones of the performance in making medical diagnosis. In two groups, subjective characteristics are represented by self-assessment of heuristic competence, emotional stress, problem-adequate behavior and escape tendencies in problem solving. There were no significant differences in the objective performance (making diagnosis) between the experts (departmental heads) and the subexperts (first contact physicians). The authors found that the expert group was better able to justify the process of making diagnosis and gave higher assessment to their heuristic competence than the subexpert group. The differences in subjective characteristics between men and women were not significant. In the second experiment, using a group of physicians and a group of university students, we examined the influence of realistic content of a task and experiences with its specific content on deductive reasoning. The tasks were of the modus tollens type which required contrapositive transformation of the rule. We found that university students had a higher percentage of correct answers and less serious errors. Both groups performed better in realistic tasks. The results are interpreted using the concept of pragmatic schema and mental models.
The sample of 1490 medical students (average age: 19 y.) was examined with the aid of EPI. Out of them, 350 came to the psychological advice center with personal or study problem; 1140 medical students represented common population. The investigation has confirmed the fact that forms (A) and (B) of the questionnaire are not equivalent: they are different for all three scales: (E), (N), and (L). As opposed to common population, a lower rate of extraversion both in men and women was found in the case of the counselling population. Men of the counselling population displayed higher values of extraversion than women. The values of neuroticism in men of the counselling population were higher than those found in men of the common population. In the common population, women displayed higher values of neuroticism than men. The study has proved that higher values of the L-scale are difficult to be interpreted, and that it is not possible to determine a unified extreme L-score for the forms (A) and (B). It has stated that the form (A) produces higher L-score and that some items of this scale do not practically differentiate. Local norms for both the common and counselling population of medical students represent part of the study.
At the present time, psychotherapy by Rogers does not represent a unified system; it is an international movement of which different approaches are typical. If we remain on the territory of consultancy and clinical psychotherapeutic practice, then four basic approaches can be identified: classical Rogersian, philosophizing, eclectic, and differentiatedly integrative. In practice, the eclectic approach is the most spread; it is applied even at setting up complex psychotherapeutic programs. Differentiatedly integrative approach links up with the preceding one and seems to be the manifestation of the theoretical effort at searching for a general psychotherapeutical model that would be scientific, reliable and useful in practice. In Czech lands, Rogersian psychotherapy has got tradition of more than thirty years. Psychotherapeuts of this orientation are associated in the Prague Institute of Psychotherapy and Consultancy orientated at the client. Within the Czech Association for Psychotherapy and Family Therapy, the section of Rogersian psychotherapy is active; this conception is also lectured at the Faculty of Arts and at the 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague.
The study deals with the application of the specificity principle in the conceptions of aggression. In many conceptions, the tension between unitary and specifying approaches to the aggression is evident. The relation between the principle of specificity and integration is explored. The author follows these tendencies in the conception based on the hypothesis of frustration-aggression, in the arousal theory of aggression, in the conception of moral disengagement, and in social-cognitive theories.
Paper deals with the question of how perception of different nations is organised and structured. Slovak university students (50 men, 50 women) made pictures of 10 different nationalities and pictures of themselves as well, on semantic differential scales. These pictures differed according to the object perceived (nation's prototyp) but they did not differ according to the sex of perceiver. More important, two main dimensions were identified on which representation of nationalities is made, First dimension reflects level of civilisation perceived nation holds (from the point of perceiver's view). This dimension stresses cognitive aspects, knowledge, level of education, abilities and aptitudes. Second dimension informs about socio-emotional characteristics of nation perceived (in concepts of friendness, thrustwortness, readiness for cooperation). Results lead to hypothesis that semantic space is flexible and changes its structure due to both, category of objects and characteristics of perceivers.
High school grade point average, entrance examination results from biology, chemistry, physics, and interview predictive value of academic achievement was assessed using data collected on 113 first-year students of the 3rd medical faculty in Prague. First, the assumption of incremental validity of high school grade point average (mathematics, physics, biology) during four-year study and student evaluation on the basis of entrance examination interview in addition to test of physics, biology, and chemistry, which are the criteria for admission, was tested. As a criterion the natural logarithm of first-year grade point average weighted by number of failures to pass an exam was chosen. Regression model I., where mathematics, physics, biology grade point average was one regressor, tests for biology, chemistry, physics the second one, and interview evaluation as the third independent variable accounted for 35 % of variance and the regressors contributed to the criterion explanation in the 3:2:3 ratio. In attempt to make the predictive model as parsimonious as possible a factor analysis result was used to select the variables with the highest predictive potential. In model II., the grade point average from mathematics, evaluation of a text reproduction, which was a part of the entrance examination interview, and test of physics, was included into regression analysis as the predictors. Model explained 34 % of the criterion variance and the first two regressors accounted to the criterion variance equally, the last one quarter more. Second, the predictive value of temperament traits was sought using Cloninger Tridimensional Personality Questionnaire. The backward regression analysis excluded all variables but NS, NS4 and RD3 and accounted only for 10 % of the criterion variance. The findings brought support for the assumption of the high school grade point average, and entrance examination interview evaluation incremental validity, and indicated that academic success of students with proclivity to impulsive and at the same time rigidly systematic behavior aligned with emotional attachment might be adversary influenced.
Influence of gender and age on the perception of frequency of occurrence of cases of injustice in interpersonal relations and on the frequency of occurrence of anger as reaction to these cases were studied. It was assumed that women and young people will more often feel anger in the above mentioned situations. This assumption resulted from the gender-role specificities and developmental characteristics. 347 subjects aged 18-67 years participated in the research. Perception of the occurrence of injustice-provoking situations and frequency of the occurrence of anger were assessed by the original SVN Questionnaire. The subjects referred to both the parameters studied (occurrence of the situation and occurrence of intensive anger in it) in 16 situations. Selection of situations and formulation of the items issued from the classification of the cases of injustice by G. Mikula (1993). The results confirmed (MANOVA 2 x 4) that both gender and age have got very strong impact on perceiving anger as reaction to injustice. Women and young people described higher frequency of intensive anger than men and elder people. The age affected also the stated frequency of occurrence of critical situations which was manifested in some situations only, not in the total score. When interpreting the results, the consistence of responses found in both parts of the SVN Questionnaire was used; the coefficient of reliability (alpha) was 0.8598 in the part studying the frequency of occurrence of particular events, and 0.9040 in the part studying the anger in these cases. Consistence of both parts of the questionnaire was also confirmed by factor analysis. Thus the hypothesis was suggested that differences that were found have been the manifestation of different levels of sensitiveness of injustice in the interpersonal relations.
The study sums up present knowledge about chicanery at work. The term first appeared in the seventies, in American professional literature, and it was worked out at the beginning of the nineties in the Scandinavian countries. Chicanery at work is a heavy social stressor; the subjects place it on the second place on the life events scale, i. e., on the level of divorce (Zapf 1995). The following phenomena can be classified as chicanery at work: (1) all deeds the aim of which is to hurt, humiliate, or frustrate repeatedly colleague, superior or subordinate; (2) all kinds of repeated behaviour by means of which life is being made disagreeable for the persons mentioned above, they are provoked, terrorized, or appaled. According to the results of some authors, the primary causes of chicanery at work are not personality traits of the chicaning person, nor of his/ker victim, but work conditions and social environment in the organization. Potential negative consequences of chicanery for mental health and health of the chicaned persons are discussed in the study.
In the beginning, the clinical datas of the occurence of the spiral drawing in the state of the depression and presuicidal tension is discussed. Multiplicity and meaning of the occurrence of drawing of the spiral from the psychology of mental representation, psychology of experience and psychology of culture is analyzed. The experimental approach aimed at verification of significance of the occurrence of spiral in free drawing using empathy of the induced psychic state of the depression and joy. Our hypothesis was verified: hand in band usual symbols that is shown in drawing and painting during depressional ill-felling significant multitude of ocurrence of spirals in the experimental group 1 (54 persons, age 35,6, SD = 9,5) and experimental group II (53 persons, age 27, 1, SD = 7,8) was found. The example of occurrence of spirals in the clinic casuistic and examples from history of art were introduced. Drawing of spirals occurres often in states of frustration, feeling of limitation, emotional deprivation, depression and suicidal tendencies. The spiral can be explaned as mental and expressional representation of the psychophysiologic and psychic processes. There is mimesis of experience and its reflection of the crouching, the inhibition, the need of defensive hiding on the one hand, chaos, turbulence of thoughts, perseverance of experienced problems on the other hand. , In the conclusion the importance of the free drawing expression and arttherapy in depression is indicated.
The author is engaged with the roots and proceedings of integration in psychotherapy. This trend is typical mainly of the last decade when - after the rise of hundreds of partial psychotherapeutical movements - the pressure for reasonable. integration has become more and more apparent. The moving moment was represented by both the need of clinicians, and the pressure of insurance companies. In the sphere of psychotherapeutical integration, the whole scale of phenomena has gradually appeared: starting from eclectic joining of methods, over searching for common factors of particular therapeutical orientations, up to the struggle for coping with the problem of integration from the theoretical point of view. The author characterizes briefly these main particular trends, inclusive of some of their representatives. A special attention is paid to the psychotherapeutical integration under our conditions. The author mentions the contribution of Prof. Knobloch in the sixties, as well as the meritorious work of Prof. Kratochvil, together with the whole group of experienced therapeutists from the Institute of Integrative Psychotherapy and Psychological Consultancy, whose organizational seat is in Olomouc.
The psychological situation of the unemployed youth (unemployed graduates of the secondary school not being accepted at the university) was operationally defined by means of the construct ''subjective well-being'' (subjektives Wohlbefinden). From among the models explaining the subjective well-being, the structural model (Becker, 1991) assuming two basic components: actual and habitual, was given preference. The relation between two basic components has not been solved yet; this causes problems in psychodiagnostics. The hitherto used methods for assessing variables of subjective well-being are influenced by that and greater or smaller psychometric deficiencies can be found in most methods used. This affects also the examining of the influence of unemployment on the subjective situation of this group. The solution suggested - the combined procedure of finding out subjective well-being (consisting of three methods: diary of the personal feeling, questionnaire, and interview)- offers one possible starting point for obtaining valid information about this important group of young people and about their coping with the unemployment.
In the process of classifying 4 145 adjectives carried out independently by 6 experts, the German classification system including 5 main categories (1. Disposition, 2. Temporary conditions, 3. Social and reputational aspects, 4. Overt characteristics and appearance, 5. Terms of limited utility) was used. Each of the main categories included 2-4 sub-categories, i.e., 13 subcategories in total. From among the personality relevant adjectives, the evaluating terms (3c), terms describing the temperament and character traits (1a), and terms characterising emotions, inner states and readiness to reactions (2a) were the most numerous ones. Terms expressing activities and behavioral states (2c), social effects (3b), roles and relationships (3a) occurred most rarely in the list of adjectives. The reliability and stability of classification was determined, too. The results obtained were compared with the results of the German taxonomy. In further phase of the research project, 366 adjectives enlisted by the majority of experts into the category of Dispositions will be analysed in more detail.
In the past, hyperactivity did not belong to symptoms which psychoanalysis paid especial attention to. The characteristics of hyperactive behaviour were, nevertheless, included into the impulsive neurosis, mania and maniac defensions, and into the structure of defences against the depressive experience. Oral fixation seems to be the prerequisite of hyperactive behaviour and experience. The source of increased tension and subsequent hyperactivity can also be a stronger constitutional instinct outfit. Hyperactivity is connected with the instinct excitement that is not sufficiently sublimated. The bipersonal point of view in the psychoanalysis refers to the importance of the quality of relation between mother and child for the development of hyperactivity: difficulties in early contact of child and mother, impossibility and low capacity of the child to get related to the early object with the feelings of security, affected development of stable internal object and insufficiently internalized capacity of the child to regulate the excitement (because the mother did not cope with her task of calming and quieting down the excitation of the child). The personality of permanently hyperactive children is often formed into a picture of narcissist, dissocial or marginal disorder. Hyperactivity treatment can be both pharmacological and psychotherapeutic, as each of these approaches has got different effects. Pharmacs can quiet down behaviour and general excitation, but they do not affect the personality disorder and defects caused by partly hindered personality development; there is, on the contrary, a wide field for psychotherapy here.
A hypothesis is verified in the study according to which the adolescent smokers have got more tolerant attitudes towards the abuse of the non-alcohol drugs than their non-smoking equals in age. The hypothesis was verified on a sample of 955 students of grammar schools, secondary apprentice schools and secondary apprentice training institutions in different regions of the Czech Republic. The results show that between the smoking and non-smoking students within particular types of secondary institutions there exist statistically highly significant differences in attitudes to the abuse of these drugs. Approximately 50% of smoking students in our sample have manifested positive attitudes towards the abuse of the non-alcohol drugs. Further on, the comparison of the data obtained by us with the original data of the KN92 Questionnaire authors suggests certain shift in the direction of a higher degree of tolerance towards this abuse that has taken place in the last five years.
The above mentioned inventory enables us also to assess Anger-in, Anger-out, and Anger-control. We concentrated on at our ''first tryout'' only on the first two scales i. e. State-Anger and Trait-Anger, where Trait-Anger consists of two subscales: Angry Temperament and Angry reaction. A self report procedure can be seen as the most valid method to measure these aspects becouse emotion are private events which cannot be observed more accurately than by oneself. The separation was performed by an exploratory factor analysis. Three factor solution (state, temperament, reaction) accounted for 45% of response variance. Internal consistency is satisfactory. Elaboration of the three remaining scales have been under investigation yet. This concerns criterion validity and concurrent validity as well.
The authors deal with the traumatic experience in child and with the possibilities of its therapeutical affecting. On a casuistic example of a child whom his mother attempted to murder, they try to show the coherence of the ''Medeia complex'' when the aggression against the partner is passing on to the child. The attempt at murdering the child was motivated by the vengeance at his father when the procedure of divorce was taking place. Traumatic experience was manifested in the boy both in somatic and mental spheres. The psychotherapeutical intervention was aimed at the integration of this trauma by the ego of the child and at minimizing its negative consequences. The authors point out the necessity of psychotherapeutical approach to the traumatized child that can prove as helpful in processing the arised problem.
Eysenck personality questionnaire EPQ/A, emotional balance estimation questionnaire DEP36, and Leary's questionnaire ICL (level LI. and V.) were administered to the sample of 472 students (212 males, 260 females) during entrance examination at the 3rd faculty of medicine UK Prague. The examinees were informed that the results would not influence the entrance examination committee decision. The findings are presented as the scales distribution central tendency and variation for males and females separately. The partial norms for EPQ/A scabs are provided.
The authors consider the aggression as the realised activity which is located between the subject (aggressor) and the object (victim). The resulting model of an aggressive activity does not include the identity of the object and of the subject of aggression, nor the organic conditioned aggressions. The authors formulated several general characteristics of aggression: a) the activity of the aggressor, b) the man is the only possible subject of an aggression considered to be a moral important act, c) purposefulness, d) aggression is a learned activity. e) the subject of aggression evaluates the object of aggression lower than his aim in the given relation, f) the basic relation of the subject to the object of aggression is the relation between men, g) the aggressor has not interiorized enough the biophilia values and his moral positive activities are not sufficient stable regarding the situation. From the standpoint of the aim of the aggressive behaviour, the authors distinguish two kinds of aggression: h) the aim of the aggression is the aggression itself, 1) the aim of the aggressive behaviour is outside of the space of the aggression - the aggressor injures the object hindering or making difficult to achieve his aim. On the basis of the characteristics mentioned, the authors concluded that there are the following general types of aggression: 1) immediate direct, 2) immediate indirect - substitute, 3) immediate transferred, 4) mediated - intellectualised.
Many-sided development of human has belonged to the humanistic ideas of the philosophy since the Ancient (Classical) Ages; it is important for education and consultancy, for mental hygiene, as well as for the improvement of the labour power mobility; theoretically, from the viewpoint of the personality structure and development. Members of the Department of Psychology at the Faculty of Arts, Charles University in Prague, in cooperation with numerous graduands and graduates, have studied this problem since the sixties. From the psychological point of view, they define the many-sidedness - one-sidedness - undevelopment of the personality by means of combining data about activities, personality subsystems, motivation, and development of the individual. The one-sidedness of the personality is also expressed by means of marginal areas of the polar personality traits, while the middle zone of traits corresponds to the many-sidedness of the development The many-sided - one-sided development of activities, especially at the age of 11-19 years, was studied, too. Several forms of many-sidedness - one-sidedness - undevelopment in adolescents and grown-up persons was differentiated. From among the conditions in operation, especially the following one were studied: socio-cultural conditions of the family,important others off the family, groups and hobby-groups, common activities, way of education within the family, activity of the individual, passivity of the individual, changes in the way of life in mature age. Unfavourable conditions are, in many cases, more or less compensated by other conditions, external ones, but mainly by the individual's activity, his/her effort aimed at self-determination. The compensating, and - on the other hand - disturbing operation was expressed by means of the personality development conception in branches that diverge or converge according to the complementary conditions.
The study describes the software means of forming and using psychological methods questionnaires and scales of attitudes, semantic differential, repertory grid - as well as the editor of data serving as the entry of data from the questionnaires of the pencil-paper type. Further on, the hypertext modification of the Eysenck EOD Questionnaire (Eysenck Personality Inventory, EPI) - the experimental version is described; it enables working with qualitative answers of the respondent, as well as using the possibilities of the computer administration. In all of the above mentioned methods, the users' principles of work with methods as well as the possibilities of communication with the supporting software, such as Improv for Windows, SPSS for Windows, are presented. With the aid of the Improv table calculator (spread-sheet), the exchange of data is possible even through the dynamic exchange of data (Dynamic Data Exchange, DDE) in which Improv is the client. The study also presents the merits of the computer methods as compared to the classical,,paper'' methods, as well as the hard-ware demands on their using.
When studying the achievement motivation, the relation of achievement motivation to anxiety seems to be an important question. The hitherto studies did not respect the fact that anxiety is not one-dimensional. On the basis of factor analysis of the STAI Questionnaire, we isolated in keeping with other authors - two components of state and two components of trait anxiety (based on positively and negatively formulated items). In 123 university students-men, we studied the relation of these components to achievement motivation, to anxiety slowing down performance, and to anxiety supporting performance. Our analysis was also completed - on the basis of previous results - with the relation to the temperament characteristics and to the L-score (EOD). We have found that individual components of anxiety affect achievement motivation in a differentiated way. Achievement motivation and anxiety supporting performance are equally increased by the fact how happy the student considers himself to be, and how strong the state anxiety is which he experiences. In addition, achievement motivation correlates with the L-score: the higher the L-score is, the higher the level of achievement motivation seems to be.
The study reports on an experiment concerned with judging about the subjective duration of 10 letters of the Czech alphabet (D, C, K, Ch, S, R, L, N, R, P), that was performed in 20 subjects aged 41, majority of them being university graduates. Letters with high frequency according to the language vocabulary (e.g., K, D, P) displayed short duration, while - on the contrary - letters with low frequency displayed long duration. This is interpreted by semantic facilitation of the trace in case of larger range of semantic networks. The estimated duration of letters was, further on, compared with the objective word production on given letters per 1 minute, with the indicator of lexical/semantic saturation of letters, and with the indicator of the lexicon exhaustibility according to the output in the 3rd minute as compared to the 1st minute. All variables that were studied were in statistically significant correlation mainly with the exhaustibility of the vocabulary that is in a very close relation to the number of letters and to the verbal production. Letters with short duration, therefore, have got greater vocabulary, higher verbal production, higher lexical semantic saturation, and low exhaustibility of verbal production. The opposite holds for the case of letters with long duration. According to the results obtained, the theory of facilitation by means of semantic networks has got higher support than the theory of information.
The author attempted at contributing to solve the problem whether and how far the way of education within the family can affect the stability-lability (neuroticism), extraversion-introversion, and its components, and how far the heredity or other factors participate in the variance of these trais in population. These two aspects were linked up and the impact of heredity and education on these personality traits was studied in an identical sample of twins. On the basis of the statistical results it can be assessed, how far a certain trait can be influenced by education, and how far it is hereditary. It is an important issue for both psychology and pedagogics, for the possibilities of influencing an individual in a desirable way since the childhood. This problem, however, asks for a more detailed study for the purposes of pedagogical and psychological theory and practice.
The aim of the article that follows three preceding theoretical studies is to present the proceeding and results obtained at setting up the lists of personality relevant terms. According the given instructions, four categories of personality relevant terms were excerpted from the Dictionary of Literary Czech Language: (1) adjectives (lazy); (2) attributive nouns (laziness); (3) type nouns (lazy fellow); (4) verbs (to laze), and their semantic reduction was carried out. We found that 16% of adjectives are potentially personality relevant. Personality relevant attributive nouns are somewhat more frequent (7%) than the type ones (5%). Concerning verbs, 7% of terms were evaluated as personality relevant. The results are compared with the data from lexical studies in five European languages. Particular lists of personality relevant terms form the basis for their systematic and detailed taxonomy.
Relations between well-being, operationalized by Subjective Emotional Reactivity Questionnaire (DEP36), and Eysenck's personality dimensions (JEPQ, 16), Moos' Family Environment Scale, Teacher-Child Rating Scale were analyzed using multiple linear regression models and ANCOVA. Apart from personality questionnaire, data were collected three-times during ninemonth interval on a sample of 14-year-old 323 boys and 248 girls. Due to absence of children and teachers from school, missing responses, and technical problems in cooperation with some schools, only 97 boys and 98 girls had complete data from the three measurements. The study based on the data from the first measurement supported an assumption of relation between relatively stable dimensions of positive and negative emotion reactivity and dimensions of extraversion, neuroticism, L-scale, impulsiveness, and empathy. The values obtained by the DEP36 was found reliable as a predictor of children social and task oriented behavior at school and their perception of family mainly from the cohesiveness and family interrelations point of view. Intraindividual variability of emotional reactivity during nine-month interval estimated on the data from reduced sample seems to be rather weak predictor of intensity and intraindividual variability of both behavior and cognitive processing of social information from family environment. The findings indicate that subjective emotional reactivity might be important aspect of positive health. The indicated relation to hereditary temperamental trait is not strong enough to eliminate the possibility of subjective emotional interpretation style change and it could be expected that emotional sensitivity training might play central role in primary prevention programs.
Expected relationship among experienced life meaningfulness, experienced well-being, and self-rated objective health has been subject to statistical evaluation using the Logo-test (a life meaningfulness questionnaire by E. S. Lukas), Dep36 (a subjective emotional reactivity questionnaire by J. Kozeny), and Health rating (objective health self-evaluation scale by the author) in a sample of 353 undergraduate and graduate level Czech university students. Through correlational analysis of the data, the hypotheses, deduced from the theoretical frame of V. Frankl's existential analysis, of an unequivocal functional relationship between experienced meaningfulness and well-being and of two mutually contrary functional relationships between experienced meaningfulness and objective health are supported.
The lifestyle of vegetarians can be comparatively clearly differentiated from the lifestyle of general population. We think that differences in external manifestations are caused by differences in personality characteristics of vegetarians and non-vegetarians. The study presents results obtained by using the Freiburg Personality Inventory in a group of 178 vegetarians. From the statistical point of view, the following groups of probands are compared: vegetarians versus control group of nonvegetarians (N = 154), semi-vegetarians (N = 54) versus lacto-ovo-vegetarians (N = 96) and vegans versus vegetarians (N = 28); the simultaneous influence of food and sex was studied, too. Vegetarians and non-vegetarians differ significantly in dimensions Nervousness (t = 2,54(+)) and Dominance (t = 4,18(++)). The synergic effect of food and sex (F = 3,91(+)) has been proved in the dimension Dominance. The subgroups of vegetarians formed from the viewpoint of the extent of restriction of the consumption of meat differ in dimensions Nervousness (F = 3,09(+)), Openness (F = 3,17(+)) and Masculinity (F = 4,49(+)). It has been confirmed that vegetarians and non-vegetarians differ concerning personality characteristics. The specification of psychological differentiating features of vegetarians and general population can be a help when predicting the behaviour related to health; it can thus make the prevention from civilization diseases more effective.
Informatively, the basic principles of Jung's general theory of types are discussed. When processing information, each individual alternates permanently four basic mental functions: sensation (S), intuition (N), thinking (T), and feeling (F). Outwardly, he/she manifests them by means of attitudes of extraversion (E) and introversion (I). Orientation towards the outward world is in progress by means of judgement (J) and perception (P). Psychodiagnostic application of the type theory is represented by Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI). Experience are given from the Slovak standardization of MBTI. The reliablitiy of the indicator can be held for sufficient. The validization studies are under intensive work. Up to now, for example, a higher coherence in life orientation as well as in positive self-estimation of general ability to performance in the bearers of T function has been found. Representatives of F function tend to a higher occurrence of concomitant emotions at solving problems and to a more frequented evaluation of people in social environment. Distribution of types in the population sample (n = 442) suggests dominance of the INTP type. Application of the type theory at individual psychodiagnostics in consulting and pedagogical practice is discussed, too.
The strive to produce behavior - event contingencies, and thus exerting primary control, is a powerful behavioral tendency in both human and nonhuman mammals. Humans, however, hold a unique ontogenetic potential to elaborate and re-structure strategies of control throughout their life span. The human life span entails a sequential and age-graded structure of opportunities, challenges and constraints to the exertion of primary control. These life - time - structured constraints will be considered in terms of their biological and socio - structural components at the various periods of the life course. It is proposed that primary control is inherently constrained by the necessity to selectively invest effort. Moreover, the specific age - graded constraints confront the individual with unavoidable losses in primary control. Because these losses are aversive, they put at stake the individual's affective balance, and thus call for strategies of affective adjustment. Such adjustment can be achieved on the level of mental representations, that is by autoplastic means, generally referred to as secondary control strategies. It will be argued that the specific type of secondary control (e. g. goal adjustment, favorable social comparison, re-interpretation of causes) used will be functionally adapted to the particular loss in primary control encountered. Telling exceptions are pathological coping, which either involve tenacious goal pursuit beyond feasibility, or premature forfeiture of primary control in favor of secondary control. Secondary control strategies are thus viewed as functionaly serving long-term maintenance of primary control potential by balancing negative affective responses to losses in primary control.
The results of an experimental research of the cooperation in the group problem solving (the research was done in the psychological laboratory of Prague university) were based on the computer registration and analysis of all solving and communicative acts. They brought not only the new knowledge concerning the group processes but also the structure of the groups investigated. When describing the structure of the three-members groups the author of this methodical study tried out the numerical procedure known from trigonometry: the transmission of the length of the sides of the triangle to the angle values. The result of the simple computations is not only the numerical transcription of the initial data. The degrees of angles of an triangl express always the ratio of the lenghts of its sides, that is why they inform about the relations among the values of the initial quantities, i. e. about the relations among the individual members of group evaluated. Just this content of information has considerable significance from the stand-point of social psychology. The transmission of the length values to the angle values serves simultaneously to their normalization: the summ of the inner angles in any triangle is always the constant (180 degrees). The normalization makes then possible the quantitative comparison of the structure of arbitrary triades from any aspects-independent on the type and the dimension of input data. The use of trigonometry in quantitative description of differences in the structure of three-members groups proved to be good in the connection with the elaborating of great number of empirical data obtained in investigation of more than 50 groups. In the study the author clarifies the advantages of the used method of structure quantification in the simplified model of twelve groups not differing in any aspect except of the structural-relational characteristics. The numbers from 1 to 10 represent the number of applications for communication sent out or accepted by individual group members; the total summ of applications in all groups is the same. The author presents first the differences in the profile of groups, expressed by the most common way: with a help of percent values. Then, he characterizes the peculiarity of the structure with the help of angle values and he demonstrates that the information obtained by the new way gives the more truthful (more adequate) picture of relations among the partners. The transmission to the angle values makes possible: a) to find out if the members of given group are or are not compatible (i. e. if the structure of the group is homogeneous or heterogeneous), b) to assess the measure of the structure asymmetry (regarding the extreme value of one of the partners), c) to assess the degree of the unbalance of the structure (in comparison with the group the three members of which are equal). The closing part of the study deals with the classification and the quantification of four types of relations which can be investigated in analysing the communication among the partners in triades.The types of relations: a) couple type (A: B, A: C, B: C), b) reciprocity type (AB: BA, AC: CA, BC: CB). interpersonal type (e. g. AB: AC: half of/AB + AC/), d) mutual type (/AB + AC/ : /BA + BC/ : /CA + CB/). Psychologists meet in their professional activity relatively often the natural triades (e. g. family, work, sport ones). So they could define with more precision their diagnostic conclusions with a help of tested method of group structures quantification. Regarding the fact that even the more-members groups consist of triangular substructures, the recomended method can find the broad application in practice.
The study is drawing attention to the developing research orientation of psychology of creativity differentiating the cognitive style from hitherto mostly level-approach to the creative abilities. The cognitive styles in the context of creativity represent the different ways how man can express his creativity. By this, they differentiate from the level of abilities where the extent, the degree is determining. The advantage of the style-approach compared to the level-approach is the fact that it is linking up the static and isolated abilities to the personality noncognitive traits, which are important for the way the creativity is expressed. Except of the general differentiating traits of the style-approach and the level-approach the study deals in detail with those dimensions of cognitive styles, which were by now investigated in the most intensive way in the connection with creativity: convergent vs. divergent style, adaptive vs. innovative style, the connections of creativity with the dimensions of the in/dependence on the fieid, and complexity vs. simplicity. In the context of creativity, the cognitive styles are connected above all with the following approaches: 1. the creative style is differentiated from the noncreative style, 2. the styles are considered to be the two different poles of the same dimension, both the poles are contributing to the creativity, but in the different way, 3. the creativity is defined according to the other criteria (e. g. the tests) and the correlates of the creative achievement with the dimensions of further cognitive styles are searched for. Although there is an effort to prove that the style and the level are orthogonal, respectivelly that they differentiate in a sharp way, the majority of researchers agrees to the fact that these two concepts are mutually connected - some dimensions are connected with the abilities by the common characteristics closer while others are little dependent. Cognitive styles in the framework of psychology of creativity require the further intensive empirical research. Many interesting implications for the area of social and educational psychology indicate that it is well-founded.
In the study, the authors overview some factors significant at the rise and maintaining of the erectile dysfunction. They keep in view the influences of age, constellation of the nuclear family, partnership relations, as well as personality characteristics of patients with erectile problems. They are focused mainly at potential impacts of psychiatric disease (namely, different types of neuroses) and addiction at alcohol and drugs. They assume that according to the presented findings it would be too simplified to limitate the approach to erectile dysfunctional patients only at the sphere of sexual reactions and sexual behaviour.
The totalitarian society may appear from the psychological point of view as an emotionally immature society, composed mostly from the emotionally immatured individuals whose inner world is ruled by the inner totalitarian objects - first of all by the mighty authorities which are internalized by every individual in the course of his/her socialization. It seems that the early outer parental objects have the totalitarian character for the child, because the child perceives them as very mighty ones from its dependent position. The totalitarian objects, inner and outer, are intrusive, they have the tendency to own the others and to manipulate them, and they have no respect to the individuality and to the social and individual differencies. Instead of individual values they strive for the establishment of an ideology, obligatory for all. This ideology enters then both the Ego and Superego. The totalitarian objects are threatening, but on the other hand, it is possible to look for the safety in their shadow, if the man identifies with them. The post-totalitarian society is the society in the developmental crisis, the people try to overcome their inner totalitarian structure, which is defending from the democratic social attitudes, but the old inner totalitarian objects are characterized by a certain rigidity and they have the tendency to persist in the inner world of a man. The experience with the patients in psychoanalysis and in the psychoanalytical psychotherapy confirms rather this. The author presents two clinical illustrations. The post-totalitarian world needs to create the generally acceptable psychological representation of non-totalitarian post-oidipian authority, which is missing so much in the social (political and parental) and psychological totalitarian world. This task has probably a transgenerational dimension and it cannot be achieved by any social revolution but only by the gradually psychological evolution of generations. The author submits his theory of totalitarian objects. The concepts outer and inner totalitarian object enable to follow the parallel of the psychological and social world in some of their connections.
In June 1993, the adolescents aged 15-17 years from one Lower Austrian and one East Slovak grammar school (N = 328) were compared by means of five scales of the Bern Questionnaire of Subjective Well-Being (Berner Fragebogen zum Wohlbefinden Jugenlicher, BFW). The aim of this comparison was to identify the attributes of subjective well-being (Wohlbefinden) in youth from different types of societies, as well as to verify the compatibility of the method that was used and of one of the theoretical models of subjective well-being. From the analysis of the results follows that in the scales ''well-being in life'' (Lebenszufriedenheit) and ''missing depressive strain'' (fehlende depressive Stimmung), the East Slovak girls proved significantly more unfavourable values as compared to the Lower Austrian girls. This finding does not hold for boys who - with regard to the nationality - do not differ in these variables (the scales in concern are those compatible with the model). In the third scale - compatible with the model of subjective well-being, i.e., in the scale ''physical problems'' (korperliche Beschwerden), it was found that differences in results were influenced by sex. Girls manifest significantly more physical problems than boys, irrespective of the age and nationality. In the fourth scale, i.e., in the scale ''self-evaluation'' (Selbstwert) that is not - with great probability - compatible with the model of subjective well-being, the groups under comparison differ highly significantly, and that to the East Slovak adolescents' disadvantage regardless the and sex. The research report provides suggestions (for) considerations about possible factors of differences that were found. And, at the same time, it provides one of the possible methods of diagnosing the parameters of subjective well-being.
In 33 patients of compulsory sexuological treatment with the diagnosis of exhibitionism, the basic psychiatric, phorensic/sexuological, social, partner characteristics and characteristics of their basic families were determined by means of detailed anamnesis and psychodiagnostic examination. The personality traits were, later on, determined with tbp help of MMPI, Leary's ICL, DOPEN, and MAS; the level of intellect, by means of Raven's test of progressive matrices. The results that were obtained witness of the fact that a high number of individuals coming from disturbed families, problematic figure of father, and their disidentification with him, tendency to higher intellectual level, good professional qualification and work stability, satisfactory partner adaptation, high specific relapse, rate, and latent crime-rate are typical of the examined group. From among personality characteristics, it is in the first place introvertness, anxiety, neuroticity, and discrepancy between real and ideal self-reflexion as a manifestation of insufficient self-acceptation.
At present, the re-evaluation of the concept of ''intelligence'' takes place. Psychological aspects of the research into this construct are full of contradictory tendencies. Up to now, mainly diagnostic applications of the principles of academic or theoretical intelligence have prevailed. In spite of their failure in social practice, they are fully applied in the methodological arsenal of contemporary psychodiagnostics. Warning is provided by experience obtained in application of tests of intelligence in the U. S. A. Gradually, principles of practical intelligence started forming, as reaction to breaking away from the tasks of real life. Practical approach is focused on the ability of individual to act in harmony with the external world of social structures and interactions, to play a variety of roles in different situations, to link up and maintain interpersonal relations and connections, to interpret accurately the intentions of others, etc. Theoretical starting points, as well as, basic structural/processual concepts are referred to. Attention is also, paid to variables applied conceptually at the study of practical intelligence. The employment of flexibility, proceduralization, latent knowledge, application construct of ''wisdom'', explicit and implicit theories, as well as currently used means of measurement are briefly discussed. From among the means of measurement, observation of behaviour in everyday social context, simulation (forming analogies to working situations), and psychometric methods are preferred. Particularly theoretical conceptions of Sternberg, Gardner, Scribner, etc., are analysed. In conclusion, demands that should be inevitably studied in the framework of practical intelligence researches are indicated. The variety of theoretical and practical approaches, and the need for deeper knowledge of multidimensionality, multidirection, interindividual variety and intraindividual plasticity are pointed out. Possibilities of increasing practical intelligence, e. g., by means of a topical using of latent knowledge at performance are appealed to. Also research projects suggested by specialists from the Institute of Experimental Psychology, Slov. Acad. Sci. are introduced.
The authors give the basic description of the method and they summarize the studies dealing with its reliability and validity. They also mention the comparative studies of the test. In the discussion, they incline to S. Deri's interpretation of the test method. The hypothesis was formulated that the Szondi's test has a close relation to the experience and it could be interpreted as the test of the unconscious determination of the experience, too.
The ''Logo-Test'' questionnaire, an existential frustration measure developed by E. S. Lukas, has been transferred to Czech by the author for research, counseling, and clinical use. This study establishes norms and psychometric properties of its Czech version in a sample of 353 undergraduate and graduate level Czech university students.
The study deals with both theoretical an practical questions of grief counselling as an emerging sphere of psychological counselling. The author analyses three basic approaches towards the problem of relation, separation and grief, whose representatives are M. Mahler, R. Klein and J. Bowlby. In more detail, it is concerned with main types of significant losses (material losses, relational losses, intrapsychic losses, functional losses, losses of roles, system losses). It is focused at symptoms and characteristics of the process of griei as a normal and inevitable mechanism of coping with significant losses. The study analyses the proceedings of the grief counselling that correspond with four tasks of grief: (1) to accept the reality of the loss, (2) to overcome the pain of grief, (3) to adapt to the environment in which the lost object is missing, and (4) to ''replace'' emotionally the lost object. The concluding part of the study is concerned with the characteristics of the methods of grief counselling (evoking language, using symbols, written work, painting, playing roles, album of memories, cognitive re-structuring, controlled imagination, dialogue with the lost object, using metaphors). The author points out the need of special preparation/training of future counselling psychologists in the sphere of grief counselling.
Two different research strategies have been developed for the study of family: the vertical one (grandparents, parents children...) and the horizontal one (relations, between married partners, brothers and sisters...); however the system approach necessitates both of them in a special way. The coevolution of nuclear or remote family members, based on the communication and cooperation, is a phenomenon typical for it. The coevaluation does not mean only the hereditary determination of new generations. It mainly proceeds in a permanent psycho-social interaction between all members in all possible directions. More over the coevolution represents a transmission of family climate, life style, system of values, nutrition habits, daily routine, aesthetic preferences. Above all, the family coevolution functions also very strongly at the cultural and spiritual levels. The contemporary Slovak family represents a historico-social ''experiment'': in spite of the 40 years long intensive atheistic-ideological pressure in official education and masmedia as well a risk to manifest one's religiousness for the professional career of individuals and their family members, more than 70 per cent of inhibitants profess a Christian faith after democratic rebirth in Slovakia. Some further demographic, sociological and psychological characteristics of the family life in Slovakia during the last years are briefly demonstrated.
Impulsiveness questionnaires I6 and I7 were subjected to psychometric analysis concerning dimensional structure, internal consistency, and stability over time utilising responses of 2 423 adolescents (I6) and 2 277 adults (I7). Using exploratory methods, items, which did not belong to psychometric family, were excluded and internal structure of the shortened versions of I6 (48 items) and I7 (38 items) was tested. LISREL 7 confirmatory factor analysis results supported hypothesized three-dimensional model for the I6(48) and I7(38) as well. Internal consistency of the questionnaires range was 0.67-0.94 and stability over time (ten-week-interval) range was 0.59-0.77. The instruments scales intercorrelation matrices, correlation between I6(48) vs. JEPQ(60), I7(38) vs. EPQ/A is presented. Means and standard deviation of the I6(48) and I7(38) scales scores are given with respect to age intervals and gender.
Psychological methods were applied to twenty healthy men (20 - 22 y.o.) in a continuously performed experiment (58 hours) under operation of different temperatures of environment (18 - 30-degrees-C). In the course of 2 hourse of our experiment (15x), apart from others, the method of reversible figure, interference test, unrepeatedly also personality questionnaires DOPEN, STAI, and DOZ were applied. Body temperature was measured during each examination. The course of the reversible figure method (that was not a performance task) was parallel to the circadian rhythm of body temperature; i.e., to the general psychophysiological activation during the experiment. The interference test, on the other hand, has proved to be a method covering higher psychic processes without any circadian changes. In spite of demanding experimental conditions, by means of the influence of high activation and psychic regulation of the activity, it was possible to maintain a long-termedly improving general performance. The air temperatures that were used have proved to be statistically insignificant. Apart from this, the manifestation of factors of neuroticism and anxiety in relation to the interference test ( P < 0.01) have indicated (by continuous improvement of the task in some of the subjects) symptoms of personality instability. In the given experimental situation, it has shown that the general integrity of personality and psychic regulation of behaviour have got an important impact on coping with demanding conditions of work (partial sleep deprivation, change of the microclimate).
On a sample of 132 students (aged 14-18) of one German and one Slovak grammar schools, equalized concerning age and sex, the attributes of subjective well-being were studied (by means of the BDP Questionnaire), as well as the attributes of self-actualization variables (these by means of the SAS scales). With the aid of variant and correlation analyses it was found that in one of the studied self-actualization components - in the extent of self-acceptance and acceptance of the world (SA) - the significant differences between Germans and Slovaks (in the Slovaks' disfavour) are closely related to the influence of nationality. At the same time, it was found that self-acceptance and acceptance of the world do not correlate significantly with the components of existing subjective well-being, but only with the habitual general life satisfaction and with self-evaluation. This finding is interpreted in the sense that a lower extent of self-acceptance and acceptance of the world in the form of dissatisfaction with himself/herself is most probably hidden behind a lower extent of life satisfaction in Slovak adolescents. On the basis of this finding an assumption was pronounced that the habitual subjective well-being is not determined intermediately, by differences in material conditions of life in both of the countries compared; it is related to personality dispositions such as self-acceptance and acceptance of the world, and to the extent of their development. The second difference is that the German adolescents perceive our world in a more realistic way than the Slovak ones; this fact is regarding the complex of the correlation analysis results and results of the Tukey Post Hoc Test (concerned with sexual differences) - in closer relation with the sex than with the nationality.
Lead and its compouds affect human organism as toxins, because lead is not metabolised but directly absorbed, dispersed into the textures, and secreted. Lead accumulates in the mineralizing textures and thus becomes a potential internal source of lead. If the organism is exposed to physiological stress such as pregnancy, lactation, or chronic disease, this normally inerted lead can be mobilized, by means of what the level of lead in blood increases. At present time, the research into the effect of low levels of lead, especially in small children, continues all over the world. The majority of them is aimed at finding response on the hypothesis concerning the scaling down of the level of perceptual and cognitive functions in children and youth depending on the level of lead in blood (Needleman, Gatsonis, 1990). The developing nervous system and mental functions in children are thus damaged much sooner - the younger they are, the sooner the damage takes place. Clinical symptoms are often similar to those of cncephalopathy. In studies treating also the prenatal period of development, it was proved that smoking, drinking alcohol, addiction to drugs, and health problems of mother during pregnancy seem to be significant risk factors for the presence of low levels of lead in blood of the new-borne children. Social environment (mother care, but also social and economic level of the family) is an important determinant of the development and can be, on the one hand, a risk factor for somatic as well as for mental development in connexion with exposure to lead: in the positive sense, they can eliminate effects of lead in every age period of the child's development.
Investigations in the sphere of behavioural toxicology provide us with data concerning the fact that even small doses of toxic agents in the environment, at a long-term operation, can have negative effects upon the mental development in children. What remains to be the outlasting problem of this research orientation, is the lack of suitable, sensitive methods that would be able to detect even small changes. The first part of the finding, resulting from a long-term (longitudinal) investigation of the effects of neurotoxic agents in the environment upon mental functions in children, confirms the relevancy of the so called processual approach. With the aid of specialized methodologies, differences between the concerned group of children (i. e., group of children who have been born and have been growing up in an industrial locality with deleterious occurrence of toxic agents in the environment) and the control group of children (for the benefit of the control one) were found; they concern the attention and memory tasks, and that mainly when performed under secondary load.
Groups of heterosexuals (N=20), homosexuals without heterosexual experience (N=10), and homosexuals with heterosexual experience in the past history (M=10) were compared. All the three above mentioned groups were examined by binocularscope (an apparatus enabling to project on each eye a slide of different content). Nudes of men, nudes of women and slides with neutral content were presented to them in 18 different combinations at the exposure time of 0.202 sec. The numbers of responses (male, female, neutral) were compared in particular groups. According to the results that were obtained, in the heterosexual group there prevail the female responses and in both homosexual subgroups of responses the male ones; however, a statistically significant difference in the number of individuals with the prevailing type of male or female responses was found only between heterosexuals and homosexuals without heterosexual experience.The authors assume that differences between homosexual subgroups are caused by different number of ego-syntonic and ego-dystonic individuals in these groups.
Women are distressed by network events and men by economic events outside the home, and women internalize their stress as men externalize it. This gender pattern of stress-distress found in the United States was tested in the 1990-1991 in the Czech Republic. The country was in the shock phase of its transition from state socialism to democracy and a market economy, and the population was experiencing economic hardships. Did Czech women and men respond differently to these hard times, similar to the gender pattern of stress-distress in the United States? The data are a two-wave (1990-91) panel study based on 294 households in the Czech Republic. Distress was measured as depression, anxiety, somatization and hostility; and stress as negative economic events (job and financial problems) and network events (friends and family). There was no pattern of women internalizing stress (depression, anxiety and somatization) and men externalizing it (hostility); Czech women both internalized and externalized stress compared to men. There was also no pattern of women being stressed by network events and men by economic events as found in the United States. Czech women and men alike reported more stress job problems than any other life event. Nor was there a gender difference in vulnerability to stress as indicated by social support and mastery, Furthermore, the effects of stressors on distress symptoms were the same for women and men. A correspondence hypothesis that social support is a buffer specific for stress from network events and mastery for stress from economic events was not confirmed. Social support and mastery buffered stress from both sources. Social support and mastery buffered the relationship between negative family events and hostility for only women; only the relation between job problems and distress (depression) was buffered for men. Interpretations of these results rest on the history of Czech women being different than that of American women.
There are various approaches to the problems in the study of stress coping. The article's introduction includes a brief overview of the definitions of stress and coping and views of the relationships between them. Of the theoretic approaches we are analyzing the following: the psychoanalytic approach, the theory of coping as a personality trait, the theory of coping as a sequence of states, the theory of coping as a specific method or focus, Edwards' theoretical approach to coping and the cognitive theory of coping and stress. We are presenting some positive and negative characteristics of individual approaches focusing on conceptual and methodological issues.
The aim of the study is to draw attention to bullying as a serious social phenomenon which in some countries already has become object of lively interest of psychologists and workers in education. After pointing to the intricacies of defining bullying and after a sketch of its phenomenology, main research topics representing different possibilities to tackle the problem are introduced. Selected illustrative results of empirical investigations are also mentioned. Theoretical problems connected with bullying are stressed and several explanatory hypotheses are offered.
In cooperation with the US EPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency), a project of observing/studying possible changes of neurobehavioral functions in children coming from areas with strongly polluted atmosphere - Teplice region, and with a relatively clean environment - Prachatice region, has been prepared. Both parts have used the hitherto existing knowledge about possible relations among the syndromes of disorders of mental development in children (according to MKN-10) related to chemical and psychosocial impacts. For the Czech part, the screening method for recording the symptoms (indications) of light brain dysfunctions was selected: the questionnaire examination and performance tests; the American part has suggested the use of NES2 (Neurobehavioral Evaluation System), and a battery of visual tests (Visual Acuity, Contrast Sensitivity, Color Vision Test). In the course of 1992, the methodology was prepared in the Czech version and verified in a pilot study, when in Prague schools, 200 children from the second grade of Basic School were examined, out of whom 100 children were from special classes, where children with different symptoms of mental development disorders are placed. The study describes the methods that were used, it informs about the results of the pilot study. Among others, other possibilities of using the NES in the studies of human population exposed to neurotoxic agents in work or life environment are mentioned.
In their study, the authors are concerned with the structural approach to personality resulting from the analysis of the lexicon. Natural language serves as a starting-point of the research within this approach. The structure of the personality description in the language is represented by 5 factors (Extraversion, Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, Emotional Stability, Culture or Openess to Experience or Intellect), generally indicated as the Big Five. In spite of certain differences, the majority of authors agree what concerns the interpretation of individual factors. Sporadic attempts at collecting personality relevant concepts have been overcome by Cattell who - as the first one - was able to catch the structure of the personality description. Cattell's investigation was re-analysed by Fiske, Tupes, Christal, Normal. Digman, and Takemoto-Chock. Investigations with adjectives selected independently of Cattell's set of variables were carried out in the English language by Norman, Goldberg and Peabody, McCrae and Costa; with partial differences, they rejoined the five-factor structure. In the conclusion, the authors mention numerous attempts aimed at the verification of the Big Five in different continuities. This will be dealt with in the next article.
The study attempts at finding out the answer on the question: What have entrepreneurship and creativity in common? The parallels are searched for on the level of activity, product, personality traits and climate (atmosphere). The hitherto knowledge shows a number of common signs of entrepreneurship and creativity in all of the above mentioned manifestations. The author endorses an opinion that entrepreneurship is a specific kind of creative activity in the socio-economic sphere. The following features are decisive for its creativity: starting a new way of enterprise linked up with seeing new, hitherto unknown, needs of the market.
The pilot study issues from a more widely framed international project aimed at the research of understanding democracy in relation to the personal and social identity of the individual. It explores the possibilities of identifying the significance (meaning) of democracy by means of the method of free associations to the selected political terms. We studied (1) the relations among political terms on the basis of joint associations; (2) semantic relations of associations to particular political terms. The results of our pilot study have shown that the method of free associations can be used as a tool for studying the meaning of political terms. The analysis of the associations on the level of particular terms as well as on the level of relations among terms has resulted in consistent assumptions that will be further verified with the aid of the interview method. It has also turned out that the meaning of political terms is innerly structured by the descriptive, evaluative, and symbolic/metaphorical associations, and that there exist numerous associative relations among the terms themselves that form part of their meaning. On the basis of the analysis of associations a hypothetical assumption can be pronounced that - in our cultural context - the term democracy is associated mainly with individual freedom, with human rights, with prosperous economical system, with pluralistic political system. The connections of democracy with the juridical system, with independent justice, are less apparent. The term democracy is related explicitly neither to the system of distribution, control, and balance of executive power, nor to the system of democratic extra-governmental institutions.
In the study, author attempted elucidation and re-evaluation of approaches to the analysis and understanding of communication, with respect to recent ideas formulated by research workers in this sphere. A brief review of opinions of prominent psychologists and representatives of often contradictory trends suggests that allusions to the significance of language in psychology are permanently present. Author tried to point out and at the same time to interpret the fact that he considers the approaches to the analysis of language and communication determined by logic little effective. He tried to describe this state also in attempts to set up a valid definition of the meaning of words of natural language (the starting-point being searched for in philosophy), to that this definition might be used when establishing the explanatory theory of the phenomena of semantic vagueness, etc. He points out a strong trend of contemporary psychology that analyses the phenomena of natural language and communication with regard to the dominance of interpretation processes and pragmatic aspects of communication. He attempted to set up a question whether the prevailing, mostly positivist research paradigm is able to explain the pursued phenomen to the full. In conclusion, he formulated a couple of - in our opinion - important problems concerning the full-value interpretation of communication acts of natural language.
Windelband's dividing of sciences to the nomothetic and idiographic ones and Dilthey's classification of psychology to the explaining and understanding one formed the problem of two methodologies of psychology of personality which can be included into the wider problem of two psychologies. Furthermore, the theoretical plurality is symptomatic for psychological sciences of the 20th century, which is manifested especially in psychology of personality. This all reminds the concept of praeparadigmatic state of science in the meaning of T. S. Kuhn. Only some of different theoretical conceptions of personality are corresponding either to the standpoints of nomothetic sciences and to the explaining psychology or to the standpoints of idiographic sciences and to the understanding psychology. On the contrary, many conceptions of personality imply the mixing of these two approaches in different proportion. According the author the contradictority of both the methodological approaches in their traditional formulation is questionable, because there is much evidence about the fact that the psychological respect to the individual need not be connected with the standpoints of understanding psychology and it can be realized in the context of explaining psychology. The source of main difficulties is seen by the author not in the existence of the methodological alternatives mentioned, but in the lack of the linking of the results obtained by both of them. It is demonstrated by the concrete case of characterization of a person. Except of that, both the methodologies are specific logy there is a deficiency of objectivity of characterization, in explaining psychology the difficulties caused by the operationalization of concepts operate. For its perspective, the psychology of personality should make this problem to its priority theme and find its solution.
There is little published experience with the Czech version of WAIS-R, standardized on Czech population. A sample of 40 epileptic patients, aged on an average 31,9 years (SD = 8,2), was examined by the W-B method and after approximately 7 years, aged on an average 38,6 years (SD = 9,5), the WAIS-R method was applied. When using the W-B method the mean values were CIQ = 107,0 +/- 12,5, VIQ = 107,1 +/- 13,3, PIQ = 105,7 +/- 13,2. Using the WAIS-R method they were CIQ = 98,9 +/- 11;2, VIQ = 99,2 +/- 11,4, PIQ = 96,1 +/- 11,9. The correlation of both tests were 0,819 in CIQ, 0,845 in VIQ and 0,675 in PIQ respectively. The significant correlations with the education in both the methods are basically the same. The correlations with the age are statistically non-significant in both cases, but in WAIS-R clearly lower what gives evidence of better psychometric qualities of WAIS-R. When analysing the particular cases the two extreme subgroups can be distinguished: a) the subgroup of five persons showing extraordinary great lowering of IQ values in the second measurement (by WAIS-R method), more than 15 points of CIQ, b) the subgroup of five persons showing in the second measurement (by WAIS-R method) the increase of IQ values, in spite of the greater difficulty of WAIS-R. In all persons with the extreme changes of IQ values there are clear relations to the changes in the attack frequency and/or to the social and psychological adaptation. The results give evidence of good psychometric characteristics of the Czech version of WAIS-R, but also of the need for repeated control examinations of the intelect performance.
The study compares the theoretical bases of Albert Ellis, the founder of the rationale-motive theory and therapy, with those bases that are contained in the work of J. B. Furst. Both authors base their explanation on the study of neurotic dysfunctional expressions where they emphasize that these expressions are conditioned by irrational attitudes and beliefs. The similarity of their theoretical approaches is emphasized.
The study is concerned with some aspects of the Rorschach test in children, namely with the meaning of ''paternal'' and ''maternal'' tables, manifestations of LMD in the test, depressive and suicidal signs. Further on, it is focused at the possibilites of prediction and development of the Rorschach scores, manifestations of egocentricity measured by means of the Exner's index of egocentricity and manifestations of interfered girls in the Rorschach test. The article estimates the contribution of these studies to clinical practice, as well as their contribution to better understanding the unconscious or less conscious aspects of experience. The less intensive usage of new studies is caused by different ways of signing and by the great number of new scores and indices that are not used in our country. It is difficult to assimilate these pieces of knowledge to clinical practice.
The aim was to extend the scope of knowledge on the process of forming the attitudes of youth to their future vocation. The research was carried out with regard to special class of vocation - the builders professions. The sample consisted of a group of children aged 5-13 years (n = = 130). The basic method was exploration based on questionnaire, supplemented with drawing of a standard situation (a construction work). The author points out the role of content and form of the information recieved in the process of attitude forming. The results show that before choosing the line of study or apprenticeship youth has not got enough information about the chosen vocation. A higher rate of acquaintance has got influence on forming a positive attitude and a more relation to the vocation. With increasing age, the part of mass media as an intermediary of information and an important professionalizing factor is increasing, too.
In the study carried out with 9 pairs of twins, where at least one twin suffered from schizophrenia (5 monozygote and 4 dizygote pairs of twins), the Halstead--Reitan Neuropsychological Test- Battery as well as other neuropsychological tests were used. Manifestations of neuropsychological debilitation were found in 11 out of 13 schizophrenic patients, and in 1 man out of 5 mentally healthy subjects. This man, however, had been through a head injury in his childhood, and - later on - had much worse school achievements than his twin, in whom schizophrenia was later diagnosed with still more marked neuropsychological debilitation. Performances in schizophrenic patients are significantly lower than those in healthy twins. The correlation of performances in twins are relatively low, the schizophrenic disease has got an evidently stronger influence than the genetic affinity. Results of the research correspond to the assumption that neuropsychological debilitation can be found in a considerably high number of schizophrenic patients. In the Czech environment, this study represents one of the first attempts to apply the Halstead-Reitan Neuropsychological Test-Battery; it gives evidence of a possible usefulness of its Czech translation.
The article contributes to the conceptual analysis of mental representation the study of which is a frequent theme of contemporary cognitive psychology. In the opinion of a number of authors, mental representation together with concepts of symbol and computation is one of the central concepts of cognitive psychology. Similarly to the so far non-existent unified theory of cognitive processes, neither these concepts are used in a unified way. Attention is concentrated on the analysis of content and extent of the concept of mental representation as comprised in psychological theories developed in dependence on the computer paradigm. This analysis is carried out by means of the study of discrepancies existing in the psychological theory of mental representation; these are caused - among others - by different definition of this concept. This fact, however, is not always reflected in the corresponding psychological terminology. From among discrepancies among different conceptions and theories of mental representation, as well as from among discrepancies inside the more important ones, the following differences are studied: (a) differences in opinions on differentiation of mental representation and presentation; (b) differences in conceptions of mental representation forms (especially different opinions on imagination and propositions as tools of mental representation); (c) differences in conceptions of relation between symbolic and mental representation that follow from different definition of the symbol, and - in dependence on it - of the meaning. The analysis results in determining the basic conceptual definitions of mental representation in contemporary psychological theory.
Eventual relationships between the Logo-test (an existential frustration measure by E. S. Lukas) and psychological scales of the Cloninger's TPQ, Eysenck's EPQ and IVE, Amthauer's IST, Leary et al.'s ICL (all in their Czech versions) have been examined in a sample of 131 Czech university medical students. Statistically significant correlations have been found predominantly with the more experience-determined traits than with those considered to be more genetically determined. This finding is interpreted as supporting the logotherapeutic conception of specific kind of independence as well as interaction between the ''meaning-in-life'' quality and personality dimensions.
The factor structure of partly modificated Bern questionnaire of subjective well-being was tested in sample of 655 adolescents from East Slovakia, fifteen to eighteen years old. The results support the five factors structure found out by the authors of the original questionnaire. The realized modifications concerning the formulation of the introduction statements to the scales measuring the topical parameter of the subjective well-being didnot influence the content aspect of these scales. On the contrary, according to the assumption of the author, they form the precondition for the more explicit interpretation of the topical and habitual aspect of the subjective well-being and simultaneously they make possible the more explicit attaching of particular scales of the questionnaire to such constructs like the correlates, moderators and indicators of subjective well-being are. On the basis of this differentiation, the scale ''self-estimation'' is not considered to be an indicator of the subjective well-being, contrary to the other four scales, but to be one of its correlates.
The professional carrier of humanistic psychologist R. May is recalled as well as his ideas concerning humanistic psychotherapy and counselling.
The study issues from the analysis of health in a group of students (Ist grade of the Faculty of Medicine, Charles University) that was found at the entry preventative examinations; it deals with the possibilities of preventative care about students of medicine at the beginning of their studies. The university student's health was studied, and that both subjectively felt, and objectively given; further on, health risks caused by genetic load, as well as university students' life style on the Secondary School and the beginning of their university studies. On the basis of the data that were found, students were given information about potential risk factors affecting their life. The results show that health of the studied group of students is unsatisfactory. A high percentage of allergic diseases, infectious diseases, diseases of movement apparatus was found; in girls, high percentage of menstrual cycle disorders. When estimating the family load, certain relations among the diseases found in grandparents, parents, and wrong life habitudes can be seen. When studying the life habitudes, the shift of wrong habitudes from the Secondary School to the University was found; due to changes of conditions of life, we found their worsening, and, consequently, even worsening of unsatisfaction. In order to define certain groups of students, factors from the above mentioned spheres were accumulated. These groups included both groups of students in whom good health was found, as well as optimun life habitudes; and groups of students with certain health risks resulting from health, family load, or their life style. When accumulating individual negative factors, groups were formed of about 10 students; when accumulating grave, negative factors, groups of about 3-4 students were formed. These risk groups of students will be studied in the future, they will be given intervention help within the framework of students' consulting centre. Thus, students will have the possibility of viewing their health and, consequently, the possibility of its affecting sooner than any health problem arises or might arise.
The paper provides a review of opinions on adolescence as a developmental stage, the data about occurence, stability and structure of adolescents psychological problems as well as ways of their identification. As the review has shown it, adolescence is fraught with many educational, personal, social and behavioral problems. Their conceptualization depends on the ways of data gathering and (theoretical or practical) orientation of authors. The evidence about the occurence of psychological problems gathered mainly in the recent years on European samples is so rich that maladjustation may be seen as a ''normal'' phenomenon in adolescents life.
Empirical results concerning an importance of various future expectations and a self-system of adolescents are included in this article. A Scale of Future Expectations, Identity Style Inventory, Self Modalities Inventory, and Self-Esteem Scale were presented to 445 adolescents (age from 13 to 18 years). The most of possible future goals were assessed as important. Gender and age differences were found. Concerning their future life, girls reported a higher importance of good interpersonal relationships and family, boys asserted the importance of their own social prestige and their own career. Younger adolescents reported higher importance of career and family life, older presented higher importance of future leisure time. The various aspects of adolescents self-system are related to five more general domains of future expectation. The level of self-esteem, gender and age of adolescents predicted the importance of social prestige. Informational and normative styles of identity, as well as importance of self-assessment according to authorities and importance of ideal self according to parents were related to future prosocial orientation. The importance of future family life was not predicted from adolescents self-system. Future leisure time was positively related to high importance of self-assessment according to peers. The relationships between future leisure activities and self-assessment according to parents were negative. The importance of basic values (health, career, and money) was predicted from the importance of self according to parents and from normative oriented identity style.
The study sums up several up-to-date psychological approaches to the understanding of memory. It introduces the clinical model of memory by Lezakova; it discusses the problems of using tests of memory in practice. Several Czech studies on memory are referred to. The study analyses in more detail the contribution of Russell for the diagnosis of memory. It presents the differentiation of testes of memory, as well as the problem of lateralization of memory processes. It recommends the combination of different tests of memory in practice, especially the figure and verbal ones. It points out the usefulness of dividing the short and prolonged memory also in clinical practice and the use of retarded recall after a longer interval of time.
The analysis of change in characteristics of individuals over time is stymied by various problems: 1.) the imprecise measurement of change with the difference score, 2.) distortion of relationships between the change and other variables due to the errors of measurement, 3.) unequal possible changes in individuals with different initial scores, 4.) ambiguity of the concept of change extent. The paper Is an introduction to these problems requiring no preliminary statistical and psychometric knowledge.
The whole of Wechsler Memory Scale (Form 1.) was applied to the set of 214 non-resident adult patients (116 males, 98 females). The Spearman's coefficient of serial correlation has been calculated. Intercorrelations among particular observed variables are also introduced. The study is rather of an exploratory character aimed at searching for relations among variables. (1) In the Czech transliteration of WMS, too, the memory quotient MQ has got - according to the original Wechsler's proceeding - an appropriately performed corrections with regard to the age. (2) Both statistically and objectively significant correlations of memory performance in relation to epilepsy were proved. It concerns, in particular, an explicit linkup of memory debilitation with higher frequency of grand mal strokes (attacks), as well as with higher frequency of other types of attacks, with early appearance of the disease, with the presence of organic lesion (i. e., with the known cause of disease), and with the disability pension for epilepsy. Only few decisive correlations with the disease duration, with unfavourable course of the disease, and with the heredity were found. (3) With regard to sex, significant differences were manifested. (4) What concerns general variables, high correlation between memory and educations is a matter of self-evidence. Less expected is a significantly worse memory in bachelors (long unmarried men). Those sick, who had got in touch with psychiatry, have got a somewhat worse memory. On the contrary, those who admit occasional subjective wish for help from psychiatric or psychologist, have got obviously better memory. The variance indicates the need of specialized help also in case of educated and psychiatricly inconspicuous patients.
In 410 students of secondary training institutions (305 girls, 105 boys, aged 14,5 15,8 years), the author followed the influence of anxiety on their school achievement. The mean of results in five monthly classification served for the coefficient of school achievement, the rate of anxiety was set up on the basis of attained value in the factor of neuroticism in Eysenck's personality questionnaire. The anticipated hypothesis that anxious students will show worse results as compared to those attained by less anxious ones was not proved statistically. Statistically significant results were obtained, however, when applying the extraversion-introversion dimension. School results in anxious girls with marked extravert orientation were significantly worse as compared to markedly extravert, but less anxious girls. The author ascribes this fact to the interaction of high neuroticism and high extraversion. The ascribed traits - sensitiveness, uneasiness, aggressivity, exciteness, changeability, impultiveness - seem to be the traits that worsen the school achievement. In the research, the author arrived at further findings: (1) As compared to the norms for population of Prague secondary schools and secondary training schools, the students of secondary training institutions seem to be more anxious. (2) Non-anxious students score at, the highest level of the scale L, the anxious ones at the lowest. Students with worse results attain a lower score on the scale L as compared to students with better results. (3) The majority of students keep within the limits, of average results. It is 79 per cent in boys, and 66 per cent in girls.
In the research, the author proved the hypotheses concerning the influence of self-monitoring on the perception of expectations in interpersonal situations. In three interpersonal situations, the extreme groups characterised by high and low levels of self-monitoring were compared, The results showed that in the group of high self-monitoring persons the expressive discrimination of particular situations is displayed. It was also confirmed that there are differences between the two groups in the structure of behavior expectancy when comparing the perspective self-in situation versus person-in-situation.
Authors directed their research at the role of temperament traits in forming of the meaning of self, namely from the point of view of its content and structure. The research was carried out in the group of university students. The subgroups investigated were constructed on the basis of the temperament dimensions of extraversion (introverts-extraverts) and neuroticism (stable - unstable). The results expose the existence of specific differences in both the content and the structure of meaning of self in dependence on the temperament traits. The differences are discussed in detail.
In the framework of environmental sciences, in latest fifteen years the new scientific branch - behavioral toxicology - was established. This research orientation starts from the fact that even small doses of some industrial toxic materials (especially of the heavy metalls) can involve the nervous system demage when they are longterm affecting the organism. These demages are indicated on the level of behaviour by the changes of psychological functions, too. The problem remains open if psychology has methods sensitive enough to be able to detect the discrete changes in tangented psychological functions. In the study, the results in this research area are evaluated and made accessible. The starting points for specific psychological research are suggested.
Description and statistical verification of CAMI (Control, Agency, and Means-ends Beliefs) used in Czech sample (1217 children in age 7-14, coming froin 4 Prague schools) strives for concept validisation of the structures and vectors used. The second part of the study demonstrates three data comparisons of Czech and German (once also East- and West German) children based on studies published until now. Differences (especially remarkable in dimensions of Agency Beliefs vector) are hypothetically interpreted with respect to political/ethnical background, and to the present educational and cultural environment of children in both samples. Probable impacts on motivational characteristics and self-concept specifics coming from short-term and/or long-term, traditional life experiences, in the Czech children population are discussed.
There are three reasons given why we have to pay attention to the psychology of religion: there are phenomena in religion we have to understand as psychologists; there are religious people we come in contact with as psychologist in the praxis and there are believing psychologists we cannot completely understand without paying attention to their faith. The main part of the article tries to define several basic terms: religion and esp. christian religion, belief, faith, psychology of faith etc. There is an overview of the history of the psychology of religion and a look at the present state of it. The most studied topics of psychology of religion are reviewed: coming to faith (metanoia), quest, maturation of faith, pastoral care, overt and covert signs of faith. Some 20 different methods used in the psychology of religion are reviewed and recommended further literature given.
The Czech version of Family Environment Scale (Moos and Moos, 1974, 1981) was subjected to psychometric analysis carrying out item analysis (proportion of scole responses, internal consistency), internal structure (relation among scales, correlation pattern of items and scales). The responses of 181 boys-mean age 13.8 ys, SD = 0.5, and 184 girls-mean age 13.8 ys, SD = 0.4 were analysed. Most coefficients generated were below the acceptable level for practical or research use. An attempt to revise the scale using the original items in order to increase psychometric acceptability was not particulary successful. The findings illustrate the importance of examining psychometric characteristics of widely used methods.
The study was aimed at the search for relations of subtle changes in cognitive functions and in behaviour of children to the level of lead in blood, as well as to find out possible interaction of the level of lead in blood with health, mental as well as social variables that affect the neuropsychic development in children. In 395 children (aged 9-10 years) living permanently in Bratislava, mental functions as well as some behavioural activities were examined. At the same time, children were taken venous blood in order to set the level of lead. On the basis of the levels of lead in blood that were found, the ample was divided into three relatively equal groups of children within which the performance in psychological tests was compared. The group of children with the level of lead in blood equal to or higher than 40 mu g/l has got a significantly worsened performance in the memory (Benton) test and in the test of intelligence (Raven). In the sense-motor (Bender) test and in the attention (VD) test, certain worsening was proved. At the same time, negative behaviour was found statistically significantly more often in these children. However, the findings correspond with the effect of negative factors of family environment (level of monther's education, smoking within the family).
In the study, the authors present a survey on the state of knowledge about self-concept in the contemporary cognitive and social psychology. When analysing theoretically the above-mentioned problem they are mainly concerned with the content and structure of the self-concept. Apart from the definition of self-concept and explanation of its cognitive and affective aspects, they also introduce the conceptualization of ''I'' as of the subject of the activity.
A relation of semantic differences within free word paired associations to Amthauer's TSI and its verbal bloc was tested in a group of 74 persons (39 men and 34 women). The statistically significant correlations-were proved in the case of several semantic relations between verbal stimuli and responses with regard to the test mentioned above, some of them positive, the other negative as it was in the former research focused on the problem of relation between syntactic bounds of free word paired associations and the Amthauer's test.
Introduction into methodology of moral reasoning, esp. represented by the Kohlberg's theory, and methods of james Rest are presented. With respect to continuing cross-cultural verifications of the main issues as so as to the possible effect of historical/political experience in the post-communist countries, the pilot study (104 adolescents and young adults, in four groups) was realized. Analysis of variance revealed significant differences between groups in prae-, conventional and post-conventional reasoning, not in ''advanced conventional'' ones. Gratuitous blood doners scored highest in items/stories with individual values, the young religious group in items/stories subsumed as social''. Discussion of the forms of evaluative procedures (P % or other forms) leaning to the results obtained is aimed to the perspectives of further international collaboration in this area, which is highly actual now.
A sample of 154 inpatient alcoholics (98 males and 56 females) was divided into four subgroups defined by the combination of two dichotomic variables: presence of antisocial personality (ASP) and presence of familial alcoholism. In thus defined four types personality profiles, risk factors from childhood, and treatment related factors were analyzed. The main results are: Most differences can be attributed to presence or absence of ASP. Male alcoholics with ASP are characterized (a) by indicators of psychological dysfunction as measured by personality inventories; (b) by risk factors from childhood, and (c) by worse response to treatment interventions. The results suggest that attention should be paid to differentiated treatment intervention for alcoholics with ASP and nonASP (see Litt at al., 1992). The results related to female alcoholics indicate conceptual difficulties in the measurement of antisociality in women.
Various definitions of psychology of religion are described, explaining the phenomenon of religion from the point of human behavior and experience. The trend of the development of psychology of religion and mainly the theoretical approaches are also explained. A. Vergot, who analyzed religious experience, attitude, conversion, etc., amphasized the possibility of a scientific approach to religious expressions in man. Furthermore, some results of empirical studies by various authors (personality and religion, instigating a religious experience, sect membership, spirituality and psychotherapy, quality of life) are discussed. V. Satura deals mainly with the psychology of meditation (within the framework of pastoral psychology). The development of psychology of religion requires interdisciplinary cooperation which would be desirable in our conditions as well.
The methodological study presents results of research into needs of unemployed graduates. The used methodology inventory of needs (IP-3] finds out the actual level of need satisfaction, ideal image of need satisfaction, and the degree of need satisfaction, or frustration. The sample consisted of 221 unemployed graduates from the Slovak Republic [94 men and 127 women). The results show that in comparison to normative population, the needs of unemployed graduates do not differ in the extent of frustration. They do differ, however, in the actual level as well as in the ideal image of satisfying various needs. Differences were also found between unemployed men and unemployed women. Needs of unemployed men show an active approach, while unemployed women shut off into the problem of their unemployment, and they have a lower need of establishing social relations and being interested in the needs of others. Methodology IP-3 depicted very sensitively the dynamics of needs under the impact of a serious life situation.
Hightower's Teacher-Child Rating Scale was translated into Czech and the wording adjusted several times on the basis of experimental data. The presented psychometric parameters are based on the ratings of the 1st grade (N = 91) and the 8th grade (N = 407) pupils. The internal consistency of the final version estimated by Cronbach's standardized alpha coefficient has ranged 0.79-0.96. The factor structure (maximal likehood, varimax, extraction according to hypothesis) accounted in average for 70% of variance and approximated simple structure for data from both samples. Statistical differences (MANOVA] between sexes, negative relations between assertive skills, task orientation, and negative subjective emotional reactivity (DEP36) were found using data on the 8th grade sample. As the psychometric characteristics were considered adequate for the use of the method the experimental version of the norms was constructed normalizing cumulative percentage of the raw scores for the 8th grade pupils data.
The authors of the study are closely related to the Rogers' conception of psychotherapy. They pronounce critically upon the assumption of uniformity and universalism, what concerns the ethiopathogenesis of psychogenic and psychosomatic diseases as well as their therapy by psychological means in the original conception of client-centered psychotherapy. In their opinion, the differentiating point of view with intention to integrative conception of psychotherapy is highly desirable. In the study, readers get acquainted with the present pieces of knowledge on specific/prediction indication for individual short-term and middle-term therapies. Further, they can also find preliminary results of the research the consequence of which are hypotheses on specific incongruities and on their specific, dynamics in the following psychogenic and psychosomatic problems: states of anxiety hysteria, neurotic depression, and somatic functional disorders brought forth by mental factors. if the hypotheses on specific incongruities are proved. it will be possible to define the Rogers' psychotherapy as a therapy focused on overcoming the incongruities.
Sclerosis multiplex affects to a very substantial extent the mental state of those who are suffering from it. It is a sickness grave both in its course and in its existential consequences. One of the primary stressing factors (clashes) is the problem of knowing the disease. Under favourable conditions, it can be solved by means of early information and of appropriate, encouraging enlightenment about the nature of the disease. Practical experience issuing from the contact with patients in the rehabilitation spa centre in Vraz u Pisku, in the association of patients (ROSKA), and from the professional consulting centre gives evidence in favour of openness, balanced with personality, actual health and social disposition of the patient. Collective associating helps to individual adaptation and psycho-re-education. The knowledge of author's patients does not fall behind the world trend, it improves undoubtedly in the course of years and it is adequate, well accepted, and qualified in relation to foreign analyses.
It is assumed that the intensity of pain in the pathological process depends on the general sensitiveness to the stimuli of pain, and that it co-operates significantly at the rise of chronic pain states. The threshold of pain is an indicator of the sensitiveness to nociceptive stimulation and readiness to the creation of pain state. The opinions about the changes of thresholds in case of painful processes are not unified; the nociceptive mechanism, however, does not show a more conspicuous long-term adaptation. A longer-term (mal)adaptive changes can be explained mostly by non-specific mechanisms (a.o., by vegetative reactivity, emotions, cognitive and motivation processes and defense mechanisms). Measuring the threshold is still the best approximative test of the function of the specific pain mechanism. Measuring the relation between the threshold value and the intensity of pain will enable the estimation of the influence of specific pain mechanism on the chronic pain state. In 75 patients with chronic back pain, the intensity of pain was measured by means of the VAS method, as well as the threshold of pain in the dorsal of both hands at lower and higher intensity of stimulation by radiant heat (by the method of reaction time). A multiple regression explained the 9 % variance of the VAS value by four indicators of the threshold level that were used. Practically the same value can be explained by three indicators; one indicator explained to the most the 5,6 % variance of the VAS. Thresholds at lower level of stimulation indicate a closer relation to the intensity of pain; this witness rather the threshold understood as a measure of general sensitiveness than (economical) model of clinical pain. The results witness the significant share of threshold sensitiveness on the intensity of chronical pain; approximately one tenth of the explained VAS variance provides theoretical space for the influence of other components.
The relationship between child's affective balance and family environment as perceived by child, father, and mother was investigated using revised Czech version of the Family Environment Scale (FES-31) and a newly developed Emotional Balance Questionnaire comprising of a positive affect scale (PE) and a negative affect (NE) scale. Responses of 365 eight-graders (181 girls; 184 boys) and their parents were analyzed using canonical correlation analysis. The results suggest that for boys the perceived conflict in the family is the most influential factor for affective balance whereas for girls it is primarily family cohesion.
Three levels of moral maturity (Heteronomy - Autonomy), and 11 scales of CAMI (Control, Agency, and Means-Ends Beliefs Interview) in children 8-15 years, revealed in multiple and cannonical correlations relatively low interdependence (R(c)= .26); it is accord with our past studies based on other I - E scales. However, partial aspects of self-attributions defined by CAMI, esp. AGOTH - role of powerful others, and MEATT- role of attributes in means-ends beliefs, proved their relevance to moral maturity. Rather higher instercorrelations of CAMI were obtained with the social status of children (sociograms in classrooms, R(c) = .35), relatively high also with teachers' ratings (R(c) = .41), and the highest one with the school marks (R(c) Each of analyses proved specific patterns of self-attributional aspects to be relevant to various social contexts : e.g., the combination of high Control but low AGEFF (effort in agency), low MELUC and MEUNK (Luck and Unknown powers in Means-Ends Beliefs) to social status; and/or most scales of Agency Beliefs to school success. - Highly idiosyncratic patterns of the Self structures contexts with various social experience and moral maturity in the individual were found; verification of their interpretations is the aim of further analyses.
The methodological approach intended for the research into communication at joint activity under laboratory conditions is explained. In this case, joint activity consists in reaching concurrence of opinions, consensus, through bargaining in three-member groups. Laboratory conditions enable mutual communication among the members of the group by means of computer networks. This approach alternates with periods of spontaneous discussion in spoken language (complemented by using pencil and paper). The group has got two sequential goals: (a) to agree upon a selection of personality traits important for the performance of certain given activity; (b) to agree upon the sequence of selected trails from the viewpoint of their significance. In the computer communication, the reactions of participants have not got only the intermediate character, as it prevails in spoken language. They can also have a separate nature with repeated come-backs, as enabled by written language. Different significance segments take place parallelly, as well as in mutual interaction; this makes the content analysis on the one hand more lucid and, on the other hand, more demanding. The method mentioned above provides information both about the communication process itself, about the structure of the relevant group, and about manifestations of its members.
The ADOR questionnaire which is a Czech version of the Schludermanns' Children's Report of Parental Behavior Inventory was reduced to 20 items measuring positive relationship, hostility, directiveness, and encouragement of autonomy. Items were factor analyzed A 3-factor and a 2 factor solutions are compared. Internal consistencies (alpha-reliabilities) of individual scales are also given. On the whole, the questionnaire seems to be well suited for research in the family relationships, tentatively also as a practical use in family diagnostics.
In keeping with the biopsychosocial understanding of depression, the study is focused on elucidating some factors taking part in its rise. The contribution can be held for an introductory theoretical study that is to be followed by empirical investigation. The main aim of the study is to analyse life events as an outward factor preceding the rise of depression. The research of life events is linked up with certain methodological problems pointed out in the article. The influence of life events on the rise of psychoaffective disorders is not understood in an isolated way, but in relation to certain demographic factors (sex, age), social support, and personal traits.
In reality, our study is a replication of the original validation studies of IAS-R. The empirical data obtained by applying the Slovak version of the method show that eight subscales of IAS-R comply with its theoretical placing into a circular structure. Factor analysis confirms the validity of two-factor solution, i. e., understanding DOM and LOV as determining coordinates of the model. The results obtained by means Of the analysis of the relation between the length of the vector and other psychological characteristics, can be considered as stimulating. On the basic of these facts, we endorse the conclusion that in case of IAS-R an effective tool is concerned, applicable to the sphere of study of stabile traits of inner personal behaviour for both the purposes of research and the needs of individual diagnostics.
In a critically aimed study, the attempt is presented, to explicate the historical roots of transpersonal psychology as the so-called fourth way in psychology, reassuming directly the third way, the humanistic psychology, and sometimes being declared as a revolution in psychology. It investigates the phenomena that may be generally characterized as an extended consciousness or mystic experience and that are represented by special contents of consciousness exceeding the empirically defined psychological subject and the empirically defined space and time. The origin of the transpersonal psychology was influenced, among others, by the so-called esoteric psychologies, i. e. the psychological doctrines of various, especially eastern esoteric systems (yogha, buddhism, zen-buddhism, taoism), but also the christian mystics and the western ocultism. The transpersonal psychology confronts the basic postulates of the so-called orthodox psychology with own postulates, for example, that the spiritual or mental phenomena should be considered real the same way like the physical phenomena. It defends oneself especially against the objection that the phenomena of the extended consciousness are manifestations of the deviation in the brain activity and it stresses the necessity of the study of higher forms of a spiritual life. Altogether, the transpersonal psychology may be understood as an attempt at a metaphysically based psychology, which has as its subject the exclusive psychological states and it represents the particular response to the spiritual crisis of the west and to the crisis of the psychological scientism, but it points out the undoubtable existence of the special psychological phenomena, which were neglected by the empirical (orthodox) psychology until now, or they were considered to be the pathological ones.
If the problem of human nature in psychological and social sciences has got indeed the character of paradigm, it should be openly admitted and solved, however difficult it might be. The most widely spread paradigm is that of egoism. Selfishness is ascribed to man (explicitly or implicitly) as a substantial (if not the only one) final determinant of his/her mentality. What kind of help can we expect from the new scientific discipline - evolutionary psychology? Evolutionary psychology asks what was the mental outfit of primary man that enabled him to solve problems in his/her original environment; i.e., in the environment to which he/she was adapted in the evolutionary process. And, further on, how does the original, evolutionarily stabilized mental outfit of man make itself useful in the present, fairly different environment? Altruism (between relatives and above all the reciprocal one) is a theme to which evolutionary psychologists pay great attention. The rise of the reciprocal altruism as an evolutionary stabilized strategy is conditioned by systematic, consistent and repeated exchange of roles ''giver'' and ''receiver''. The reciprocity of utility in the evolutionary process is controlled by the individual's reproductional success. The ultimate cause of the reciprocal altruism has got, therefore, the unambiguous character of individualism. On the other hand, the proximal mechanisms (motivation, emotions, feelings) arisen in the evolutionary process of the reciprocal altruism, as well as by them generated behaviour have got an unambiguous orientation at other individuals, and that positively - in the form of help or even self-sacrifice (devotion), cooperation. The development of the reciprocal altruism took place in Hominids several million years before the emergency of articulated speech. The enlarging brain of Hominids was - most probably - the result of natural selection of individuals, more capable to realize the reciprocal altruism with a long time range, with a large individual differentiation, with refined proportions of interchangeability, and to defend it against the ''cheaters''. As a further evolutionary step, the emergency of the oughtness dimension, the basic stone of human gift of morality, is considered. Face to face with the puzzle character of social intricacy, a successful individual was that one, who had got ''inbuilt'' well-tried cluse of what to do. The morality, in fact, functions - being effective just because of the fact that it has got an additive dimension of oughtness that enables to overcome - in actual situation - the barrier of egoistic desires, to disengage from them, and to help the others.
The development of American functionalism is described from the founders of the conceptions to its main representatives and followers. Special attention is given to those authors whose books were translated into Czech (J. Dewey, G. St. Hall, W. James, I. King, E.L. Thorndike) and have influenced the Czech education and psychology.
Authors refer to the non-existence of test methods focused on the diagnostics of sexual deviations. The results obtained by means of classical psychodiagnostic methods (MMPI, Rorschach, EPI, TAT, etc.) are ambiguous and - in the opinion of the authors - contribute rather to the determination of non-sexuological characteristics (personality, ability, motivation) in sexuological patients. The authors point out the decisive meaning of sexodiagnostics and, above all, of the anamnestic (past history) exploration for clinical diagnosis of parafilia. They introduce features characteristic of the deviation development of sexual motivation: atypical orientation in the childhood, deviant masturbation phantasy, sexual dysfunction at the starting of coital activities, lapse of time between the first coital experience and further coital activities, weak motivation to usual sexual activities, lack of skill in courtship, partialistic orientation, absence of deeper emotional relations.
In the presented study, the author is concerned with several, hitherto unsolved psychological and philosophical problems: the relation of mental and brain processes, consciousness and unconsciousness, causal (deterministic) and teleological interpretation of human behaviour. He differentiates and gives precision to the content of the following concepts: intention (purpose) and objective (goal), programming and planning, wanted and unwanted results of the activities. He clarifies the specific task of consciousness in the process of preparing and performing outer and inner activities. He describes intellectual operations with three types of relations - final, causal, and instrumental - that are to be revealed on the basis of the mental model of ''action-space''. These operations are performed sooner than the subject starts forming a plan of his/her actions and interactions. As soon as the plan is formed, it is necessary to carry out the ''transmission'' from the level of conscious contents to the level of neurophysiological processes: effectors (that perform the active contact of individual and his/her environment) can be activated, regulated and controlled solely by means of nervous impulses. In this context, the author justifies his criticism to the conceptions of psychophysical parallelism, ''interactional dualism'', and transpersonal psychology.
Power, responsibility, and equivalence in psychotherapy and psychological counselling are the object of the study. The author analyses them in the framework of particular schools (psychoanalytic, behavioral, humanistic, and dynamic approaches), and also in mutually conditioned relation. He compares Perls' and Rogers' studies, he differentiates the types of equivalence in the relation between the psychotherapist (counselling psychologist) and the client; he analyses the discussion of M. Buber and C. Rogers. He is particularly engaged in the relation of power and responsibility. This study is also aimed at calling attention to the problem of using and misusing power in a seemingly exclusively helping relation represented by psychotherapy and counselling. Psychotherapist should reflect the problem of power in himself/herself; to this purpose, different kinds of experiencial training can help him/her.
The contemporary study of social loafing follows up with the investigation of Ringelmann's effects. The term ''social loafing'' indicates the abatement of the individual's motivation in the process of group task performance with common result. According to present conceptions, the occurrence of social loafing is in close relation to the concern of individual for problem solving (the importance of the task, its attractiveness), for the existence of standards for the assessment of individual performance and standards for the assessment of performance of the whole group, to the possibility of assessing the performance of individual by means of comparing it with the performance of some other person, and to the assessment of the whole group performance by means of comparing it with the performance of other group. If these preconditions are not fulfilled, the individual who does not feel as being personally interested in the problem solving, who has no possibility of self - estimation, and who knows that he himself/herself cannot be estimated by others, is not motivated to achieve the best possible result - gradually, he becomes idle. The rate of lowering his/her motivation depends, in this case, on the extent of the group; the influence on performance is in close relation to the complex character of the problem.
Our investigation was aimed at finding out differences between families in which 11 to 12 year old maladapted and socially well adapted boys are living. The data about these families were collected on the basis of statement of these boys' parents (n=53 parents of maladapted boys n=64 parents of socially well adaptea boys). All the maladapted boys have already committed some delinquent activity. It has shown that - compared with the families of socially well adapted boys-the families of maladapted boys provided their sons a less emotionally warm background. What concerns the whole way of bringing-up the child in the family, both groups of parents did not differ at all. However, it was evident that mothers of maladapted boys - contrary to mothers of socially welt adapted ones - were more liberal to their sons in the proces of bringing-up and had colder emotional relation to them. When compared with parents of socially well adapted children, parents of the maladapted boys evaluated their sons less favourably in some personal traits; they considered them worse than other children, they confided them less, and mothers punished them in a more severe way. What concerns the quality of matrimonial common life of the parents, the division of parental roles, and the characteristics of the parents' employment, no significant differences were found between the two groups of families.
The problem of brain organization of verbal processes in norm and in case of different disorders of speech development remains topical. We used our own variant of the dichotic listening test, by means of which we mapped patterns of interhemispheric functioning during the perception of verbal acoustic stimuli in healthy, dysphatic, and dyslalic children aged from 5 to 9 years. The results have shown that in healthy children, in the process of percepting words as well as syllables, the so called right ear effect, i. e., the predominantly left hemispheric processing of stimuli, is present. On the other hand, in children with developmental dysphasia, the patterns of atypical processing of stimuli have been validated: in case of syllables, compensation from the right hemisphere part (left ear effect) appears; in case of words, it is no more present, and we can see impaired left hemispheric processing with low productivity and efficiency of reproduction. In dyslalic children, no significant deviations from norm have been found. Possibilities of perspective using of dichotic listening in differential diagnosis of developmental disorders of speech are analysed.
The study sums up the development of knowledge in the sphere of stress from the classical, purely physiological theories of stress by H. Selye and W. Cannon, to the theories that - in the author's opinion - have contributed considerably to the understanding of the mechanism of negative effect of psychosocial stress on, human health. It deals mainly with the works of Mason, Henry and others that have worked out the links between mental reaction to the effect of the stressor and its neuroendocrinological concomitant and have proved the significance of cognitive and emotional components in the differentiation of stress response to the stimulus. In the contribution, personal characteristics that have been described as mediating variables in the relation stress - health are summed up in brief.
The author sums up the views and results of the research into the diagnostics of deterioration and assessment of the pre-morbid state by Wechsler's tests. On the basis of 25 studies, he states the unreliability of Wechsler's index of deterioration, of vocabulary scatter and comparison of verbal IQ and performance IQ. He points out new trends, such as diagnostics of intellect deterioration and assessment of pre-morbid level on the basis of other types of vocabulary tests in the Anglo-Saxon area, and using demographic coefficients for finding out the pre-morbid level. In spite of several decades of criticism, Wechsler's approaches are used by many clinical psychologists. The author points out the importance of clinical analysis of patient's intellectual performances and their comparison with the assumed pre-morbid performance. The importance of clinical analysis is - with regard to the low validity of Wechsler's constructions - higher than it is sometimes expected.
Albert Bandura's social cognitive theory exceeds the framework of the theory of social learning, being a complex psychological theory. The summarizing study presents a model of triadic reciprocal determinism including behaviour, inner personal moments, and external environment. Further on, the concepts of general human character and basic human capabilities are explained. Symbolization, anticipation of thoughts, vicarious learning, self-regulation and self-efficacy, moral conduct, and aggression are characterized in more detail. The application of social cognitive theory in the explanation of organizational management and mass communication is shown. The main contribution of the social cognitive theory consists in the fact that it is not closed; in includes and reflects possibilities of further development. Its merit is that it results in wide possibilities of practical application.
The study provides a summary of the most recent knowledge about the moderating part of physical activity in the relation psychosocial stress - health. On example of a number of studies, the cardioprotective effect of physical activity in the sense of reducing the absolute as well as relative response of heart frequency to mental stressor is proved. The assumed mechanisms are briefly mentioned, by means of which the cardioprotective effect is attained. The anchoring of the physical activity significance is some national programmes aimed at the support of health is also mentioned, as well as the essence of discussion in which prominent world specialists pondered over the fact whether stress is to be laid on the physical activity development, or on the physical condition improvement.
The pain is an adverse sensory and emotional experience connected with the topical or potential demage of tissues or described in terms of such demage'' (Merskey et al., 1986). The psychological presentation of a nociceptive sensation forms the basis for the origin of the pain. Conceptually, two basic mechanisms of the pain are differentiated, the specific one and the nonspecific (modulative) one. The basis of the specific mechanism is expressed in the Melzack-Vall theory of pain (Melzack, Wall, 1965, 1970). The nonspecific mechanism changes under specific circumstances the quantitative or qualitative relation between the nociception which is neurophysiologically primary and the pain as its psychological presentation. The intensity of the pain is the psychologically basic factor of the pain, its circumstances and consequences. It is specifically by the intensity of the nociceptive stimulation. It is modified nonspecifically by great number of physiological and psychological mechanisms which include among others the threshold sensibility, the vegetative setting, the arousability of cortex, the relevant emotional and cognitive personality traits, the regulative motivational processes and the topical psychophysical state. The basic advance in diagnostics of chronic pain is expected in parallel evaluation of the intensity (eventually of further subjective aspects) of the pain and of the relevant physiological correlates (eventually of the trophic changes involved by the pain).
A phenomenon of religious conversion is analysed from the view of psychology of religion. The review of older opinions about conversion (especially W. James, E. Starbuck) is supplemented by the more recent approaches stressing such factors as attachment style, coping processes, social influence as well as conscious activity of the individual in searching alternative worldview. Period of adolescence is generally considered as the most frequent age for conversion, however, conversion is possible to occur in every age. The author presents the most known typologies of conversion as well as theories of conversion process, and emphasises its variability. He also reviews some previous research on antecedents and consequences of conversion, with outlining its mostly retrospective and self-reporting nature. On the base of this research, he concludes that conversion impact can be both positive and negative. At the end, author suggests to continue in developing multivarious approach in psychological exploration of conversion.
By the means of partly adapted foreign questionnaire the attitudes to some forms of risk behaviour and the occurrence of this risk behaviour in students (n=835) of the first class of grammars schools, secondary professional schools, and educational establishments were assessed. The obtained data were tested on independence and paired correlation test was used. The results point to statistically significant connections among smoking cigarettes, drinking alcohol, using illegal drugs, and other undesirable forms of behaviour. The respondents believe that they will be less threatened by the risk behaviour than their peers. The results of the study draw the attention to the fact that marihuana starts to be preferred to smoking cigarettes and drinking alcohol. The method will make possible to evaluate the effectiveness of the intervention primary preventive program ,,I myself decide about my health - the prevention of risk behaviour in adolescents.
The study explores differences in basic parameters of skin conductance and measures of electrodermal lability between patients (12 Ss, largely with depressive episode) and normals (16Ss). The subjects were computer administered a test of word associations with response interval set to 15 seconds. During the test, skin conductance was recorded from the palmar sites of nondominand hand. Stimulus protocols were compiled from 10 emotionally negative, 10 emotionally positive and 20 neutral words in such way that a neutral stimulus was always followed by an emotional one. Statistical analysis indicates that although patients exhibit skin conductance reactions with smaller amplitudes than the group of normal subjects to positive and neutral stimuli, responses of both groups to negative stimuli do not differ. However, reaction times of both groups to negative stimuli differ markedly, revealing patient's comparative lack of ability to adaptively process conflicting material. Fourier transform of individual skin conductance data reveals, besides experimentally induced regularities, a strong periodicity in the high frequency band, difference in which between patients and normals is also statistically significant. This manifests itself as a higher number of pulses of approx. 0.5 s period in the sample of patients.
Friendship as a factor adding the dimension of permanence to sexual (erotic) relationship of man and woman and creating the stable developmental environment for a child. The necessity of this stability is proved by studies of psychological deprivation and subdeprivation. The contribution of modern evolution theory to clarifying the biopsychological basis of marriage, protection of offspring, overcoming the selfishness, and evoking the altruistic behaviour in human. New views of creative cooperation of biologically given nature and human culture (nature and nurture). Friendship from the aspect of satisfying the basic human psychological needs. The ontogeny of friendship - developing so-called psychosocial features of a child and beginnings of friendship relations in children in pre-school developmental stage. Men-women differentiation and the acceptance of sexual and gender identity in the middle school age, at the same time the growing up of instinctive protective behaviour towards a little child. The preparation for the future marriage and family life is in its basis the affair of pre-school and school age, and not the affair of sexual maturity age.
This investigation examined the motivational structure of 170 inpatients diagnosed with alcoholism according to International Classification of Diseases - 10 (F 10.2) and hence also to those of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual - IV (303.90) in comparison to 163 demographically very similar persons, both male and female. The proportions in the samples were roughly the same. Because some of variables of the Motivational Structure Questionnaires (MSQ) are distributed to a substantial extent nonnormally, the main analyses employ logistic regression analysis of differences between participants with and without a diagnosis of alcoholism Logistic regression analysis revealed significant inter-group differences in the following indices of the Motivational Structure Questionnaire. The strongest individual predictor for belonging to F 10.2 (DSM-4-303.90) was lower value on Ineffectiveness (R = -.1500, p = .0004). Lower value in Aversive Motivation showed similarly low lewels (R = -.0682, p = .0417), while with increasing Sorrow in Excess of Joy value (R = .0968, p = .0119) the probability to belong to the sample [ICD-10 (F 10.2) and/or DSM-4 (303.90)] increased. The results suggest group differences both in the effect of treatment, and in the effect of brain reward mechanism.
The idea of the natural world of human life (Husserl's Lebenswelt) has been playing in the 20th century a role of a harmonizing opposite facing the objectivistic trends of modern science. This originally philosophical idea is able on the ground of psychology - which is sometimes characterized for its more and mote practical orientation as a ''Wissenschaft ohne Gegenstand'' - to broaden its themes and deepen its cognition. And last but not least, this idea can make psychology aimed at a fruitful interdisciplinary dialog with other dimensions of human culture (theology, art, religion, history etc.). The ways of the up-to-date spiritual psychology are thus very open. The Dutch theologian and psychologist Henri J.M. Nouwen - whose book ''The Genesee Diary'' (the Czech translation of the book has a title ''I listened to the Silence'') has inspired this study - indicates one of this ways with an excellent style gifted by insights, reflections and challenges.
The relations between, economic stress and depression are examined in the context of the postcommunist transformation of the Czech Republic. At the time of data collection, the Czech transformation was past its shock phase but economic hardships continued to fall particularly hard on the elderly. The data are from 740 households in 1994 Czech Republic, with 639 women and 548 men included in this analysis. Exposure to economic stress by age and its relation to depression is tested with controls for vulnerability to stress. Bivariate results show age is related to both exposure and vulnerability to economic stress, with increases in both being , particularly sharp at retirement. Multivariate , analysis shows age is related to economic stress and stress is related to depression. After controts for vulnerability, the relation between economic stress and depression remains strong for men. For women, the relation is mediated by sense of control. Interpretation of results is done within the context of the Czech elderly being comparatively disadvantaged by the transformation.
It is shown that use of marihuana is connected to risk forms of sexual behaviour in young people, in smaller measure this is also valid for alcohol. More marked drinking of alcohol is thus connected to higher sexual risks as well in young people generally as in the young men in the army. Marihuana and more free relationships and sex form a part of some identified ways of living: hedonistic-individualistic way of life or even the way of life of territorially or philosophically differentiated communities of young people from the world of the adults. The signs of army milieu which strengthens the anonymity, masculinity, masculine sexual discourse, and collective goals are transferred to sexual behaviour and drinking alcohol. The reaction to individuality restrictions in the army is represented by e. g. strengthening the masculinity outside the army. The interactive risks of sexuality and drugs are under the strong influence of focuses of socio-cultural environment (in this case: barracks, neighbourhood unit parties). An important role is played by the distribution and the influence of the power (Rhodes, 1997) and probably also the measure and support of individual freedom as well as presence/absence of intergenerational and inter-sexual communication barriers.
The paper represents a contribution to the discussion evoked by books of J. T. Bruer (Myth of the First Three Years) and A. Gopnik et al. (The Scientist in the Crib) concerning using or misusing the scientific data for early stimulation of intellectual development of the child. The question remains controversial if hyper-stimulation of the child in the first years of the life leads later to his/her permanent higher intellectual efficiency. The knowledge from the studies of psychological deprivation in the former Czechoslovakia, from studies of resilience, adoption, mental retardation, and so-called intuitive parenting are presented. The developmental dividing line of three years is characterised from the aspect of developmental psychology and contemporary evolution theory. It seems to be important for the emotional and social development but less important for the intellectual development.
The study is based on contemporary marketing approaches and emphasizes the psychological brand attributes forming its identity in the relationship to the customer. The brand value and the brand style,is starting points for brand image understanding are defined. The brand is determined from the sight of cognitive psychology, too, above all from the sight of its contribution for deeper analysis possibilities. The intercultural dimension and the globalization events in the relation to brand perception represent the further topic of this study. The paper is completed by examples of both Czech and foreign research pointing to possibilities of exploiting the particular methodical approaches in studying these problems and to the concrete results of investigation in the attitudes of Czech public to the brand.
Playing computer games is popular leisure time activity among adolescents. A total of 393 adolescents between 15 - 21 years of age completed two questionnaires. Authors were interested in demographic characteristics, motivation for playing computer games, favourite types of computer games, differences in personality characteristics and differences in self-rating. Five factors model of personality (Big Five) was used for description of personality. Gender differences in playing computer games and differences between infrequent and frequent players were investigated. Several differences between frequent and infrequent players in preferences of types of computer games, characteristics of personality and self-rating were discovered.
Within a large scope study of parental styles of family upbringing and personality trait development in Czech youth the primary factors of the Cattells' High School Personality Questionnaire have been assessed and intercorrelated in the samples of 717 boys and 688 girls. Thereupon, the second order factor analysis has been performed, with resulting three clearly defined broader factors in both the male and the female subsamples. These compare to a large extent with the results of the first Czech higher order factor analysis by Balcar based on a Czech sample two decades ago and, with some variations, to the original Cattells' analysis published in 1969. However, some differences in the first order factor loadings have been found between Czech boys' and girls' factor patterns as well as between Czech and American teenagers. This brings forth some interesting research ideas concerning gender and culture personality differences in adolescent youth.
M. T. Bazany was an important initiator of the revitalization of psychology in Czechoslovakia in the 1950s. He established the first experimental psychology center in Slovakia. He created and put into action the new concept of psychological educational child care. He initiated the establishment of psychological educational clinics, the Research Institute of Child Psychology and Pathopsychology, the Psychodiagnostic Center, the professional journal titled Child Psychology and Pathopsychology, the Laboratory of Comparative Psychology and the Special and Treatment Pedagogy Institute. After the ocupation in 1968 he emmigrated and from 1970 - 1990 he worked as a UNESCO expert in the area of education in developing countries. After the democratic rebirth in 1990 he returned to Slovakia and as the dean of the School of Pedagogy at the Comenius University in Bratislava he brought this institution up to the standard of a European University.
The article discusses the computer program POLICY PC 3.0. This program is a judgement analysis tool. The basic procedures of this program are described: task definition, case presentation, obtaining judgements and presentation of results. Finally, the way of reporting the judgement analysis study results is discussed.
The paper provides theoretical and empirical review of the recent problems of improving social behavior of children in the middle childhood. Author realised the cognitive - behavioral modification, directed to the basic social-cognitive deficits of aggressive children of younger school age. The results based on the research with 80 9-10 year old children (40 children had social peer status of aggressive rejected child and 40 children were the favored ones) show that cognitive-behavioral therapy is effective in treatment aggressive behavior and improving the prosocial one. The most significant results were revealed in the group of aggressive rejected children, what is favourable evaluated, because these children are threatened by psychological developmental risk.
The connections of psychological state, psychological processes and immunity system are put near by means of concepts of learning, experience and the psychobiological conception of stress. It is high probable that many changes in immunity system function are realized by learning mechanisms. It is possible to suppose that the sthenic experiences optimalize the function of the immunity system and that it is on the contrary in the asthenic experiences. The psychobiological conception of stress is fairly worked out in the relation to the immunity and the mechanisms of mutual influencing are known. It seems that the chronic stress is more injuring to humans than the short-time stres. It is possible to influence the function of immunity system by psychotherapeutic procedures either directly (immediately, short-timely), or indirectly (mediately, longtermedly). Now, the psychotherapy, especially the group psychotherapy, is of use even in the treatement of oncological patients. Similarly, the psychotherapy is unsubstitutable in the therapy of the chronic fatigue syndrom (CFIDS).
On the background of the dispute of liberalism and communitarism, the Study formulates the basic sociological and social psychological questions connected with realization of individual freedom in the civic, political, and social sense. both in the context of contemporary western post-materialistic Culture and in the context of post-communist society. It introduces problerns of active participation and active citizenship as important factor in solving the topical societal problems, respectively. The question is asked, if the contemporary Youth, not influenced by the past regime, is prepared sufficiently to the role of an active citizen. Referring to empirical studies the author states that although the Young generation disposes of sufficient knowledge, its relation to politics is rather reserved. It is assumed that the only rational strategy consists in such a socialization that Would support and develop abilities and competences of children and Youth enabling them to solve and to participate on solving the societal problems. For inspiration, the overview of educational and participative projects that are being conducted both in western and in Central and Eastern Europe is mentioned.
The expected speech differences in children ageing up to three years depending on the frequency of exposing these children to TV watching represented the starting points of the study. The children were divided to three groups according this criterion. The first group was formed by those in whose households - according to the parents - the TV was on very often. The second group was formed by children from families where the TV was watched in given parts of the day only, i.e. with the average frequency. The children who watched the TV minimally or rather accidentally were placed to the third group. The authors concluded that there are connections between watching the TV and the speech development in the early age. 1. The differences in the speech production appear in the early stages of its development. In sucklings aged eighteen months, the slower start of both early speaking and words production occurs. In children three years old, the differences are also apparent - the children exposed more to the TV sending produce more mistakes in grammar and speak less clear (i.e. their verbal production is less intelligible). 2. Children staying more often in the presence of TV sending use gestures in higher measure in comparison with children in whose households the TV is watched less often. This fact was found in both children aged eighteen months and three years. 3. The differences in adjectives formation were not registered. 4. Significant differences in the receptive component of speech among particular groups of children were not found, too. An indicated trend according to that the comprehension level seems to be most matured in children in whose families the TV was on very often is worth mentioning. 5. In general judging the reached degree of speech development, the group of children watching TV middle often, i.e. with the average frequency, stands out as the most matured.
Analysing the mother's and new-born child's behaviour during suckling evaluated by Prague New-burn Description Technique by means of three times repeated measuring, the devious patterns of mothers' behaviour in the field of social support of fortnight aged new-borns appeared in the second measurement. This fact influenced both the new-borns' behaviour, and the structure of the scales in this measurement. Nevertheless, the fortnight aged new-borns' mothers' behaviour is generally similar rather to thirty-days aged new-borns' mothers' behaviour than to the behaviour of mothers in the maternity hospital. The defining of scales of the secund parr of Prague New-born Description Technique is considered as suitable for the evaluation of behaviour during suckling. The psychometric characteristics of this parr of the method cannot be considered quite satisfactory. Nevertheless, these facts can be considered as positive: a) means of all scales increasing with the age of a child, b) the decreasing variation in the scales of mother's behaviour, c) the increasing variance in the behaviour of three-days aged and thirty-days aged new-borns, d) the distribution of raw scores of all scales is moderately oblique but it doesn't show any marked deviations from normality. The quartile local norms of mothers' and new-borns' behaviour during suckling for three-days, fortnight and thirty-days aged new-borns and their mothers can serve for the comparison of results from a single examination with the results of the described sample.
The study is based on the research in the development of economical concepts and relations in the children of younger school age. Its main contribution consists in the demonstration of the method created for the analysis of conceptual network by professor Frantisek Jiranek in seventies. Piaget's psychology of child represents the theoretical starting point of the method; the research technique insists in using the questionnaire and the partly structured interviewing the child. 75 Prague children and 75 Portuguese children from university town Coimbra of the same age were examined (ranging from 7,5 to 9,5 years). Questions were oriented as to the assessment of the function of money and to the circulation of money in the society as to the value and sign function of coins and notes. The material also enables the authors to draw some partial insights into the differences between Czech and Portuguese children in this respect but it does not enable the authors - regarding the extent of both the samples and the different social-cultural and economical background which the children are coming from - to draw the conclusions concerning the differences in the development of economical concepts and relations in children from both the nations.
The study informs about the results of an investigation aimed at word associations connected to the concept of health handicap. 811 respondents took part in the investigation. The author supposed that the associations reflect as own or observed life experience with the health handicap as the effect of the measures taken by the society for the improving the life situation of people with the health handicap and their families. The single word associations were elaborated into word units and word categories, their occurrence in people with the authentic life experience and without it was followed up. The author was also interested in the character of associations from the aspect of their emotional charge (neutral, positive, negative associations). Between associations of people with the authentic life experience and without it the interesting differences were found out, to which the author gave herself up in detail, also from the aspect of findings of other authors.
In the research into subjective strain there does not exist yet an universally accepted definition; the existing theoretical models consider its complex structure as related to variables that influence its characteristics not enough. On the basis of the results of analysing numerous definitions and models of subjective strain a re-definition of emotional and cognitive component was done and the existing idea about the relation between actual and habitual aspects of subjective strain was re-evaluated. A model of subjective strain was presented that holds emotions, physical feelings and emotionally neutral periods as primary units of analysis for its structural components. The model considers the process character of subjective strain and respects the existence of actual subjective strain as strain in a period of time, and habitual subjective strain as strain typical for the individual. The model integrates factors participating in the determination of the subjective strain and classifies them into four groups: variables of the environment, variables related to the individual, variables of moderating type, and variables of mediating type.
The study deals with the theoretical concept of self as it is understood in client-centered therapy. The self and the self-concept are differentiated, the self is understood as an serf-concept that is present in the consciousness. It is pointed to the interconnection of self as the bearer of human integrity with his/her body experience and this interconnection is demonstrated by accurate (congruent) and inaccurate (incongruent) symbolization of experience in the consciousness. The study depicts an optimal functioning self, the organismic self, relying on body experience and its exact symbolization in the consciousness. Further on, the space is given to some applications of theory of self in the psychotherapeutical practice.
Influence of some situational variables on willingness to communicate intimate topics in interpersonal contact was investigated. Subjects (N=144) were asked to answer 8 questions regarding their intimate life. Obtrusiveness of these questions had cumulative tendency. Respondents answered questions either by verbal or written way. Results suggest that verbal form of asking leads to higher degree of self-disclosure than written one. Also, significant influence of sexes of both members participated in communication dyad on self-disclosure was confirmed.
The study is focused on gender issues concerning emotions, on a position of emotions as social phenomena: (1) position of emotions in gender models of warrior and mother, with the analysis of gender-stereotyped images, respectively roles of man and woman, and gender incongruent roles of a strong woman and a maternal man; (2) emotions and norms of masculinity, where the influence of cultural ideology and masculine values on a position of emotions in self-concept and social relationships of man and woman is analyzed; (3) value dimensions and functions of emotions, with the analysis of constructivist views of meaning of emotions in moral rules and norms.
Internal structure of the 19-item Social Support Survey Scale aimed at estimation of anticipated social support was tested under the Czech ambience conditions using data from 227 women living in community, average age 68, SD = 3.28. On the basis of preliminary analysis one item (18. Someone who understands your problems) was excluded from the analysis as it loaded on two factors. Using an exploratory factor analysis and a structural equation modeling three correlated first-order factors were identified: Understanding authority, Emotional nearness, Practical intervention. The Emotional nearness factor and Practical intervention correspond to Affectionate and Tangible Support, respective - factors identified by Sherbourne and Stewart. The Understanding authority factor of the Czech version incorporated both Positive Social Interaction and Emotional/Informational Support items of the original version. Internal consistency of the scales being 0.94 indicates the possibility of shortening the 11-item long Understanding Authority scale.
The study explores the relationship between the personality factors and the parameters of electrodermal activity as measured during the word association test. The aim of the study is to detect the parameters, which hold the information about the temperament characteristics. The knowledge of these parameters can extend the benefit of electrophysiological measurement in standard personality assessment. 36 normal subjects were computer administered a test of word associations with fixed response interval set to 15 seconds. During the test, the skin conductance was recorded from the palmar sites of nondominant hand. The stimulus protocol contained 10 emotionally negative, 10 emotionally positive and 20 neutral words of two levels of concreteness. The acquired electrophysiological parameters were compared with the results of Eysenck Personality Inventory. The statistical analysis indicates that the response times and the skin conductance amplitudes are the best correlates of the temperament characteristics. The habituation advancement is also significant factor, which can carry information about extraversion and personality lability at the same time. The overall habituation (decrease of skin conductance) during the test is typical for stabile personalities, while the habituation of reaction amplitudes is typical for extraverts. The physiological correlates of higher L-score values were also documented. These finding may enhance. The described observations will improve the understanding and interpretation of electrodermal data acquired during the word association experiment. The presented results will further widen the potential of the word association test and they show another applications of the test in the computer-based assessment.
The presented study analyses the dimensionality and the psychometric properties of the Perceived Sense of Community Scale (Chertok, 1999) translated into Slovak language. The author's purpose was also to stimulate and make a use of the scale accessible for broader scientific community in socio-cultural context of Slovakia. The 30 scale items were administered together with another questionnaire to a sample of 126 people attending various small church groups. Factor structure of Slovak version of the scale was to a major degree consistent with that of the original scale. As a result of analysis of internal consistency and validity, Reciprocal Responsibility and Mission subscales showed to be the suspension subscales of Slovak version. On the other hand, low level of internal consistency of Disharmony subscale suggests that the items of the subscale are ambiguous in their content and need to be further modified. The interesting finding suggesting some cultural or group differences is that the results in the USA showed Mission as a main factor whereas in the Slovak results Reciprocal Responsibility was the main factor counting for most of the variance.
The overview study brings to our attention an interesting aspect of human coping behavior the use of self-handicapping strategies. It acquaints the reader with the history of research, which started with works of S. Jones, E. Berglase on alcohol consumption as a self-handicapping instrument. The study defines these strategies and points out three fundamental functions they fulfill: self-presentation, self-protection, and reduction of affective states. It reminds of three forms of these strategies (behavioral, vebal, combined) and compares the similarities and dissimilarities between intentional self-handicaping and causal attribution. Based on literature, the study maps the main determinants of self-handicapping: individual's self (notably self-esteem, self-worth, self-efficacy), his/her hopes, motivation, effort, sex, age, social milieu, tasks to be solved. The study introduces a typology of the strategies of deliberate self-handicapping and suggests possible diagnostic methods. It states that the least attention has been devoted to intervention procedures, goal-directed modifications of intentional self-handicapping behavior.
The authors describe a range of techniques used to control validity in qualitative research. They categorize the existing techniques to those pertaining to 1. gathering information on the investigated phenomenon, and to 2. analysis and interpretation of the collected material. The first category is further divided into procedures related to a) the nature of data, b) the role of a researcher, c) the selection of respondents, and d) an independent subcategory of triangulation. The second category comprises techniques pertaining to a) the reflexive and dialogical nature of qualitative research, b) the candor and critical attitude of a scientist, c) specific procedures for data evaluation and result formulation, and d) techniques concerning the integrity, coherence and distribution of the data sample. Attention is also paid to the factors that may endanger validity of qualitative research.
The study deals with child's efficacy in A. Bandura's conception. It is defined as a belief in own abilities in the relation to specific domains of life. The authors focused the investigation to child's own competence to cope with the activities connected with the school as perceived by a child. The relations of self-efficacy to aggression and depression were investigated. The research was conducted in the sample of 222 pupils of basic schools, their parents and their class teachers. The results were analysed by the help of path-analysis. The significant relations were found among the variables mentioned which clarify the role of self-efficacy in the regulation of the children's behaviour.
Four groups of adults are compared who were growing up in a non-standard psycho-social environment in childhood, affecting to different extent their development by psychological deprivation. These children came from nursing homes, from individual foster-parent care, from SOS children villages, and other were born evidently after unwanted pregnancy. The fifth group is a control group to the ''unwanted'' children: it represents the approximate up-to-date social norm. The study is concerned with a group of 116 subjects who passed through the SOS children villages (SOS) in their childhood, and with 93 subjects brought up in foster families (PP). It was found that each of these two forms of substitutional family care has got a somewhat different selection of children. In many indices, there are no differences between the groups; however, the SOS subjects have attained lower degree of education than the PP subjects. The SOS men have significantly more often committed criminal offences they have also stated more problems in erotic relations - no such differences were found in women. The least favourable characterictics were found in subjects who entered the foster family care only at school age and who had been growing up in nursing homes till that time. The findings support the idea about the relation existing between the deprivating situation of the child and later development of his/her personality. Specific differentiation concerning the impact of educational environment according to the gender of the child is also evident.
Research results as well as theoretic studies repeatedly mention the specific problems the gifted race in their lives. These problems fall into several broad categories: poor study habits, inadequate self-image, lack of understanding and support from the social surrounding, low stimulation level of textbooks, career multipotentionality, and need for the specific career information. Special problem poses career development of the gifted women. In addition, majority of authors proclaim the existence of unique personal and educational needs of the gifted newly conceptualised as counselling needs. This survey study deals with the psychological problems and counselling needs of gifted and talented, especially gifted women. Several career intervention programs for the gifted are also mentioned.
Human value preferences stand out as the most strategically powerful causal agents shaping events in the world today. More than any other causal system, the human value factor is going to help determine the future for society (Sperry, 1974). Presented study strives to draw brief overview of research on human values and value preferences from psychosocial perspective. The begining of the article is, due to the broadness of the presented topic, dedicated to philosophical approach toward values and only later we focus on psychosocial theories of human values. The importance of crosscultural dimension in research on values and value preferences is elaborated in the final chapter.
The goal of the study was to assess the effectiveness of cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) of obesity in the sense of attainment and keeping not only of weight losses but also the changes in subjective evaluation of quality of life. CBT is applied during twelve weeks courses of weight losses with a structured programme. The sample of women leavers of the courses in 1994-1999 was chosen for this study, thus they finished their first course two to seven years ago. 803 questionnaires were delivered, 538 answers were gained, and the return was 67 per cent. The average age of participants was 45.3 years, the average weight at the beginning of the course was 86.3 kg, and BMI was 31.2. The women leavers of weight losses courses lost in average 6.4 kg in 12 weeks what is 7.4 per cent of entry weight, about half of participants was successful in keeping of weight losses. Two thirds of courses participants had after 2 to 7 years since leaving the course lower weight than when entering the course, 40 per cent kept at least 5 per cent of the weight loss what has already a positive health impact. The cause of the success was that the method leading to the change of the life style was acceptable because only in that way the change can be lasting. In more than half of participants it led to increasing quality of life. Three quarters of them kept this increased quality of life (withdrawal of health and mental problems, enlargement of social activities, change in the rank of life values, the bettering in the relation to own body).
Since being discovered at the end of the nineteenth century, the early memories method has gone through an interesting process of development and is still used up to this day. Evidence has been found of its significant potential as a verbal projective psychodiagnostic method; nevertheless, it has most frequently been studied and pursued as part of dynamically-oriented psychotherapy. The assumption underlying the method is that although consciously accepted and expressed, early memories represent hidden, unconscious aspects of a personality and functions which lie outside the individual's consciousness. The memories usually include omissions and distortions. The fact of omitting or distorting has a similar significance as in dreams. Therefore, it is not essential whether a memory exactly reflects reality or not. The significance of a memory lies in the fact that it was recalled, and in this sense recollection is a process of construction rather than reproduction. In order to apply the early memories method in practice a series of stimulus questions have been developed (for use in the context of in-depth interview), with different types of scoring systems for the sorting, categorization and assessment of the material obtained.
Our research carried out in adolescents refers to the effect of moral dilemma's reasoning on perceived responsibility. A sample consisted of 213 participants (108 girls and 105 boys, almost 92% aged between 15 - 17 years). They should name at least three situations in which they or somebody else did something good/bad. We have focused solely on statements in which participants described their own behavior. There was also used a moral dilemma concerning the artificial abortion with eight alternative solutions: four of them justified the abortion and four gave reasons against it. The results showed that our participants described their good and bad action towards specific people (as parents, friends, old or unknown persons), i.e. they mentioned the object of responsibility. Or they emphasised an internal rule according to which they understood their behavior as good or bad. From our results follows that the differences in solving of the moral dilemma of abortion are influenced by general opinion rather than the level of moral reasoning. We found out that girls describing good and/or bad action towards unknown persons as well as boys describing bad action towards mother and father showed less agreement with abortion. In comparison with this, boys describing bad action towards friend indicated higher agreement with abortion.
Psychometric parameters of the Life Satisfaction Index LISIA were tested from the viewpoint of internal consistency and factor structure using data from 124 elderly women living in community, average age 68 years, SD=3.28. On the basis of exploratory factor analysis results the original 20 items instrument was shortened and 14 items version structure verified by confirmatory factor analysis. The structure of the instrument corresponds to the structure of original English version. The shortened Czech version may be recommended as suitable for estimation of subjectively experienced life satisfaction of senior women.
There is increasing interest in the abbreviated form of the Eysenck Personality Questionnaire Revised (EPQR-A) as a research tool. A number of studies have begun to explore the psychometric properties of the EPQR-A among various cultural groups, including Australia, Canada, Israeli, Northern Ireland, South Africa and the USA using the original English language version of the questionnaire. More recently, work has also begun on examining the psychometric properties of translated versions of the EPQR-A, for example French. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the psychometric properties of a Czech translation of the EPQR-A in order to facilitate its use among Czech researchers. Data from a sample of Czech undergraduate university students were used. The dimensionality of the EPQR-A was examined. Using confirmatory factor analysis, evidence was found for the unidimensionality of the four EPQR-A sub-scales of extraversion, neuroticism, psychoticism and the lie scale. These results are consistent with those of previous research with the English and French versions of the EPQR-A. It is concluded that the Czech translation of the EPQR-A can be recommended for further use. Of primary importance is the replication of the present findings among other groups.
The paper presents an overview of studies in the field of examination stress and anxiety, and coping that were realised mostly in last two decades. It presents models of test anxiety elaborated on the basis of cognitive theories, results of studies dealing except of test anxiety also with other emotions in students in connection with examinations (e.g. examination stress, depression) and presents the Czech version of an German instrument for test anxiety measurement. The studies aimed at the examination stress coping define three main strategies: problem-focused, emotion - focused, and avoiding strategies. The studies in relations among these strategies and personality variables are presented. In the second part of the paper, therapeutic approaches to test anxiety based on behavioural and cognitive principles are analysed. The history of using particular techniques is mentioned and their effectiveness is discussed. In the conclusion, an overview of complex cognitive behavioural programmes the effectiveness of which was tested in counselling practice in different European countries (Belgium, Netherlands, Spain, Slovakia) is presented.
The study briefly introduces the reader into several alternative logical calculi focusing on the way in which they deal with uncertainty. It formulates an assumption that the uncertainty, which these logical systems describe, is present in the very basic mechanisms of human cognition and reports about two experiments which test this hypothesis. Subjects in the experiments were shown in total 15 circular figures with varying degrees of circularity or ellipsoidity. In one experiment, the subjects were asked to repeatedly decide whether the presented stimulus is a circle or an ellipse, while in the other they were to asses each of them on a scale from 1 to 7, according to the degree of their ellipsoidity. Graphical and statistical analysis of the responses and reaction times from the first experiment indicate that the mathematically inexact shapes induce the experience of cognitive uncertainty which manifests itself in the inter- and intrasubjective inconsistency of the reactions and which increases the reaction time necessary for categorizing these stimuli. The second experiment demonstrates the ability of subjects to introspectively detect this cognitive uncertainty as well as to asses its intensity.
The burnout syndrome has become during the last 25 years a much investigated variable in research, in particular in the USA and Canada, but later also in Europe and worldwide. It is beyond doubt an important psychological and medical problem with an impact on the quality of life of afflicted subjects and also on their performance. The submitted paper focuses attention on the main theoretical sources of burnout, the development and shaping of its characteristic, incl. changes in the concept of burnout as a consequence of chronic stress in professional groups, engaged in work with people, to a concept specifying as a condition only occasional contact with people and dependence of their evaluation in conjunction with the influence of chronic stress. It gives an account of circumstances which can facilitate the genesis and development of burnout or restrict, regulate or eliminate it. The authors provide information on the development of methods used for the diagnostics of burnout, draw attention to their similar and dissimilar features, inform on Czech versions of the main methods used. They describe the main similarities and differences of the burnout syndrome as compared with some disorders or diseases (depression, neurosis, neurasthenia, alexithymia, CFS, PIFS) and enlist burnout in the system of the International Classification of Diseases (10th revision). The article provides also information on the main centres in the world concerned with research of burnout and possibilities of its treatment and prevention.
Internal structure of Czech short version of POMS and the extent of factor structure replication in Czech data (N = 162) were studied. The 37 items of short POMS were subjected to confirmatory factor analysis with reference to the expected six-factor solution suggested by McNair, Lorr, Doppleman (1981). Acceptable separate factor solutions as well as complete six-factor model were obtained. A MIMIC model (Muthen, Muthen, 1998) was estimated to examine effects of age and gender on measurement parameters. Two direct effects of age on two items and two gender effects on two factors were added. The findings generally supported the claimed structure of the Czech Version of the POMS.
The prediction of adults' psychosocial characteristics on the basis of childhood and adolescent personality traits as seen by mothers, teachers and classmates.
On the basis of film documentation of psychological development of children in the suckling age, the phenomenon of intellectual joy in children solving successfully small task situations is presented. Problems caused partly by the lack of intellectual stimulation which is simultaneously evoking the positive emotions in small children and partly by the abundance of such situations forced upon a child in the improper developmental phase are denoted.
Presented study is focused on communication of adolescents in the internet environment. The study is based on qualitative methodology - grounded theory method. 16 interviews were carried out, a half of them being held in the reality and the others in the internet enviroment. The communication of adolescents is analyzed on two levels - from the point of view of adolescents, and from the point of researcher's view. The author carried out a comparison of virtual and real interviews and set the differences between them. He defines a new phenomenon in the virtual communication - the phenomenon of multiplicity of communication.
The study was focused on testing of the entrance examination as a predictor of academic achievement and success during the first four semesters of medical studies after new curriculum, emphasizing causally integrated approach to teaching medicine, was introduced. The multivariate linear regression analyses and binary logistic regression analyses conducted on the data from 452 1(st) year students broought support for the assumption of predictive validity of the entrance examination both for academic performance and academic success.
Aggression as a concept is dealt especially with connection to the contextual and discursive approaches. An ethical connotation and influence of scientific community is discussed. Different approaches to the research of aggression seems to be source of methodological difficulties concerning definition of aggression.
Social support is a multidimensional concept. So far not all its dimensions were investigated nor their part in conjunction with stress and disease. Above all in investigations of the essence of action of the social support process the wider social context where this process takes place must not be neglected. Despite the fact that the statement on the protective effect of social support is one of the pillars in research of stress, the results of investigations which attempted to provide evidence of this protective effect are not unequivocal. Some investigations were unable to prove a positive effect, while others even indicate that social support may have a negative effect. Krause's investigations indicate that the positive influence of social support in senior subjects is moderated by the socioeconomic status - it is manifested in upper social classes but not in lower ones. So far nobody studied the question whether this alarming finding applies also to other age groups. In the Czech science, the complex systematic research of social support is still in its infancy. However, with respect to proceeding socioeconomic differentiation of the society, where some stressors and their latent negative impacts will be ever more apparently socially distributed, research of social support as well as other protective factors is of high importance.
This article is focused on the existence of I elation between aggression and playing computer games. Aggression belongs to the most often reported negative influences of computer games playing, There is no significant evidence supporting existence of that relation. Many conclusions of research projects involving the topic of aggression and playing computer games are discussed. Author presents the results and conclusions above all according to two theoretical approaches - the theory of social learning and catharsis theory. Author also refers to absence of relevant results that may lead to convincing conclusions.
The aim of the study was to test if there were any differences in the identity between gender of men and women in the three periods of adulthood. A special method for the self-assessment of personal traits, group memberships and social roles of respondents was constructed. From the originally larger sample, groups of the men (n=99) and the women (n=161) were assigned to the three subsamples aged 20-25, 35-45 and above 50 years. It was found that the impact of age and Sender on the personal and social identity of respondents was highly significant. The most of differences between men and women was found in the period of early adulthood; in middle and late adulthood gender differences were minimized. This is interpreted by a period of their life cycle and distinct life circumstances (cultural norms including) in which the respondents of three different age groups have lived.
The presumption of different norm types differentiation was empirically verified on the example of retaliation. In the presented approach starting from the Norm Focus Theory the personal noons and two types of social norms: the injunctive and the descriptive ones are contained. For the verification of the influence of the norms type and the incidents type on the normative conviction concerning retaliation the results of judgment of justifying of using the different forms of retaliation on the scales of agreement vs. disagreement were analyzed. The experimental design 2 x 2 x 3 x 2 contained two between subject factors (gender and gje) and two intra-subject factors (factor norm type-injunctive social, descriptive social, personal; factor incident type-verbal attack, physical attack) and four dependent variables representing the forms of retaliation (verbal contra-attack, physical contra-attack, causing the material damage, other retaliation). The results confirmed the presumption that the expression of justifying of different forms of contra-aggression (verbal, physical, causing the material damage, other retaliation) depends both on the fact if it is a retaliation for verbal or physical attack, and on the fact if it is the injunctive, descriptive or personal norm. The presumption of productivity of employing the used model of differentiation of three norms types corresponding to empirically verified multi-facet character of the judgment of the response to the aggression was confirmed by that. Equally, the conviction concerning the justifying of retaliation and its adequacy was confirmed.
Psychology of literature represents one of alternatives to the major stream of contemporary positivistically oriented humanities which were inspired by the paradigm of the mathematical natural science. If there exist, according to Jerome Bruner, two modes of thinking - A) paradigmatic or propositional, i. e. logical scientific thought and B) narrative, let us say poetic, intuitive, imaginative thought - then particularly in psychology of literature the narrative thought (as well as its dialog with the ,,paradigmatic mind'') can display its richness and fruitfulness. This study is aimed at a work of literature which influenced, especially in the Middle European spiritual space, generations of intellectuals. In relationship to Goethe's Faust three ways of possible approach can be distinguished: critical, affirmative and hermeneutical. The third way, author's own way, is based on the quest of meaning of Goethe's capital work, the quest of topical meaning that the Faustean archetype reveals to us with regard to our own current historical and existencial situation. On this way Goethe's work offers warnings as well as hopes. The author understands Faust as a great synthesis of poetry, philosophy and religion and as a very inspiring challenge to narrative thought. In order to strengthen this view, this study brings also a reflection of the two modes of thought and an information about the original way how a contemporary American thinker John S. Dunne works with the narrative method.
The study is introduced by an analysis of the concept of virtue the - contrast between its original and contemporary meaning, and a short historic survey of the ancient, Christian and modern interpretation of virtue. The focus is on civic (social, beneficial) virtues and their significance for the current liberal democratic society which avoids imposing duties on citizens. The significance of the concept of virtues for psychology (political psychology, community psychology) and education (normative appeal, ''civic literacy'') are pointed out. The body of the study is in the attempt to integrate the empirical research related to the state of civic virtues in the transforming Czech Republic. Results of available sociological surveys, international comparative studies, including the author's own research lead to an assumption that the inhabitants of the Czech Republic (despite clear paternalistic and nostalgic tendencies in older and less educated people) have in general accepted the role of citizens. The international comparisons show that the Czech students display a democratic creed and high level of civic culture. The Czech society also manifests a great deal of trust and loyalty to its politicians, prudence, patience, entrepreneurial spirit and a high level of optimism and hope. On the other hand-''post-totalitarian phenomena'' are revealed as ''learned helplessness'', low self-confidence, low self-efficacy, ''hyponationalism'', relatively low level of working habits in youth, egalitarianism, suspiciousness and low level of civic associanism, generally unsatisfactory interpersonal relations and tolerance to fraud and swindles are also evident. According to Krejci, the test of national character is not only in the national tragedies but also in the historically happy moments. The Czechs can employ their relatively positive democratic dispositions for cultivating of democratic character and creation of functional democratic society.
The predictive validity of Cloninger's Character and Temperament Inventory was examined comparing responses collected from a sample of 100 healthy women and a sample of 101 detoxified women with diagnosis F10.2. The study was not aimed at testing any existing theory of abusus of alcohol. Analysis of findings, using GLS MANOVA and multiple regression analysis with age as a covariate, brought support for the supposition of differences between the healthy women and the sample of detoxified women personality profiles and predictive potential of the instrument.
The study deals with the method of content analysis as a qualitative method, and that in the context of broader methodological problems (Cartestian vs. Hegelian paradigms, positivism vs. phenomenological approach). It refers to the possibilities of its using in psychology, especially in the sphere of the research into communication. From the research point of view, this sphere has been neglected owing to both the prevailing positivist paradigm and the little familiarity with qualitative methodology.
The authors judge the adequacy of shortened forms of Wechsler's tests. They take advantage of experience with the development of different shortened forms of WAIS-R from abroad. They suggest their own alternative which consist of the administration of four subtests - Information, Digit, Dice and Symbols. On the basis of statistic evaluation of WAIS-R in 109 psychiatric patients, three equations for calculation of the sum of weighted scores were formed, from which it is possible to obtain the values for total, verbal and performance IQ by the help of table transformation. The correlations found (0.948, 0.919 and 0.977) point at the sufficient accordance of the shortened form with the really assessed sum of weighted scores. The standard errors of estimation (7.08, 5.19 and 4.08) are also on the level comparable with the results from abroad. The authors recommend to use the shortened version of WAIS-R under certain circumstances in psychiatric patients and in that cases when the variance of the subtests is not significant. This shortened form of WAIS-R can be used in all age stages. The authors mean that the accurateness of IQ estimation by the help of the shortened form would be even higher in normal population.
The presented study is orientated to the problem of self-serving attributional bias, which is specified as a tendency to take credit for success and to deny responsibility for failure in attribution of own behavior. This attributional bias is based on human need to protect (in the case of external attribution), respectively to enhance (in the case of internal attribution) the self-esteem. In the beginning of the study the authors notice in detail the nature of relationship between these two complementary components of the self-serving attribution. The next two parts are focused on deliminating of circumstances, which help to activate the self-serving bias or, on the contrary, defend its starting. In the last paragraph authors speculate about possible personality correlates of self-serving bias, which project to the resulting form of attribution.
The aim of the article is to provide a transdisciplinary view on the approaches of European citizenship and European identity, with respect to the socio-psychological and political aspects. The focus is on youth as the representatives of social categories (nation, region) who will, thanks to the growing mobility, enter into interactions with peers from other countries most intensively. In the first part, the group and social (collective) identity in relation to the transformation of social categories to common (European) identity is characterised. In the second part, the issues of citizenship are analysed in connection with the national and local (regional) identity. The third part is devoted to the young generation, as the main participant in the formation of Europe and its relationship to European Union. The fourth part is concentrated on the specifics of the Slovak Republic in the context of the Central European space in the sense of integration of these countries into European Union. Finally, questions whose empirical solution could contribute to better understanding of the new formed European identity are raised.
Masculinity norms are understood as social and cultural expectations and models on desired actions and feelings of a man. This research study aimed at the notions of adolescent boys and girls about the social norms of male behaviour and feelings in our society. The participants in the study, 177 boys and 170 girls aged 17-18, answered the questionnaire on masculinity norms. Two months later 116 boys of the first sample provided the self-estimation on the items of the first questionnaire. It was found out that the boys estimated themselves in the traditional masculine characteristics equally or higher than they had valued injuctive norms of masculine behaviour. The sensible differences in the structure of the masculine norms were also found which approved the girls compared to the boys in the study: the girls rejected aggressiveness and stressed the all-human characteristics (tolerance, sincerity, etc.),in men..
The author discusses the question if in the judgement the perspective of re-socialisation of entrepreneurs in violence and murder the classical criteria (personality, intelligence, family and job background, absence of criminal anamnesis) are sufficient or if pleading guilty by the offender in the course of the penal process must also be considered to be the necessary condition of successful re-socialisation as some experts do. The author infers by the means of empirical studies and by the analysis of the offender's situation in the course of the penal process that the condition of pleading guilty by the offender is not in spite of the classical criteria of re-socialisation - supported by findings of empirical studies. Neither the situation of the offender in the course of investigation and in front of the court is structured in that way that pleading guilty by the offender could be expected. Moreover, from not pleading guilty it cannot be judged that the offender is not able to experience the guilt. The author concludes that in entrepreneurs in violence and murder it is not as a rule the personality disorder but the defect in value orientation, and he states further, from the aspect of pro-social behaviour unfavourable personality traits. He emphasises that in judgement the possibility of re-socialisation of these offenders a special attention should be given to personality assessment.
The main aim of the article is mapping the contemporary scene of critical psychology and outlining some visible approaches in this field. The author emphasises the attribution of critical movement to the establishing,,the psychology of psychology. The other meanings are considered: a turn to language, to cultural determinism and to constructionism which challenges many traditional assumptions and still existing ideas in psychology. Discussion about two theses from the discursive psychology is given to suggest author's own critical view into critical psychology.
The author provides a review of recent behavioral, psychoanalytical, and psychopathological (psychodynamic) models of etiopathogenesis of paraphilias. The author, however, presumes that the role of psychological factors in etiology of sexual deviation is rather pathoplastic - modifying sexually non-conforming behavior based on inherent dispositions.